detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/9952protecting data privacy in health services research208 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309071871 | doi 10.17226/9952committee on the role of institutional review boards in health services researchdata privacy protection, division of health care servicesprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protecting data privacyin health servicesresearchcommittee on the role of institutional review boards inhealth services research data privacy protectiondivision of health care servicesinstitute of medicinenational academy presswashington, d.c.iprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press  2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington, dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.support for this study was provided by the agency for healthcare research and quality, andthe office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation, both of the department of healthand human services (contract no.282990045, task order no.1).international standard book no. 0309071879protecting data privacy in health services research is available for sale from the nationalacademy press, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., box 285, washington, dc 20055; call (800)6246242 or (202) 3343938 (in the washington metropolitan area), or visit the nap's online bookstore at www.nap.edu.the full text of this report is available on line at www.nap.edu.for more information about the institute of medicine, visit the iom home page at www.iom.edu.copyright 2000 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of america.the serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all culturesand religions since the beginning of recorded history. the image adopted as a logotype by the institute of medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient greece, now held by the staatlichemusseen in berlin.iiprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ﬁknowing is not enough; we must apply.willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂšgoetheinstitute of medicineshaping the future for healthiiiprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences. the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering. the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine. the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william. a. wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council. www.nationalacademies.orgivprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on the role of institutionalreview boards in health services researchdata privacy protectionbernard lo (chair), professor of medicine, director of programs inmedical ethics university of california san franciscoelizabeth andrews, director, world wide epidemiology, glaxowellcomejohn colmers, executive director, maryland health care commissiongeorge duncan, professor of statistics, heinz school of public policy andmanagement, carnegie mellon universityjanlori goldman, director, health privacy project, georgetownuniversity, institute for health care research and policycraig w. hendrix, associate professor of medicine, johns hopkinsuniversitymark c. hornbrook, associate director, center for health research,kaiser permanente northwestlisa iezzoni, professor of medicine, harvard medical school, beth israeldeaconess medical center, division of general medicine and primary caredonald kornfeld, associate dean faculty of medicine, chairman,institutional review board, professor of psychiatry, columbia universitycollege of physicans and surgeons, presbyterian universityelliot stone, executive director and ceo, massachusetts health dataconsortium, inc.peter szolovits, professor, massachusetts institute of technology,department of electrical engineering and computer scienceadele waller, partner, bell, boyd & lloyd, chicagoconsultantsbarthamaria knoppers, professor, faculty of law, seniorresearcher, c.r.d.p., legal counsel, mcmaster gervais, university ofmontrealross a. thompson, professor, department of psychology, university ofnebraskastafflee zwanziger, senior program officerrita gaskins, senior project assistantvprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.board on health care servicesdon e. detmer (chair), professor of medical education in healthevaluation sciences, university of virginiabarbara j. mcneil (vice chair), ridley watts professor, department ofhealth care policy, harvard medical schoollinda aiken, director, center for health outcomes and policy research, andthe claire m. fagin leadership professor of nursing and professor ofsociology, university of pennsylvaniastuart h. altman, sol c. chaikin professor of national health policy, theflorence heller graduate school for social policy, brandeis universityharris berman, chairman and chief executive officer, tufts health planbrian biles, chair and professor, department of health servicesmanagement and policy, school of public health and health services, thegeorge washington universitychristine cassel, chairman, henry l. schwarz department of geriatricsand adult development, and professor of geriatrics and internal medicine,mount sinai medical centerpaul d. clayton, medical informaticist, intermountain health care, saltlake city, utahpaul f. griner, vice president and director, center for the assessment andmanagement of change in academic medicine, association of americanmedical collegesruby p. hearn, senior vice president, robert wood johnson foundationpeter barton hutt, partner, covington & burling, washington, d.c.robert l. johnson, professor of pediatrics and clinical psychiatry, anddirector, adolescent and young adult medicine, university of medicine anddentistry of new jersey, new jersey medical schooljacqueline kosecoff, president and cochief executive officer,protocaresheila t. leatherman, executive vice president, united healthcarecorporation, center for health care policy and evaluation, minneapolisuwe e. reinhardt, james madison professor of political economy andprofessor of economics and public affairs, princeton universityshoshanna sofaer, robert p. luciano professor of health care policy,school of public affairs, baruch collegegail l. warden, president and chief executive officer, henry ford healthsystemjanet m. corrigan, director, board on health care services, institute ofmedicineviprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacehealth services research (hsr) exemplifies some of the greatest hopes andgreatest fears for collecting and analyzing computerized personal healthinformation. information routinely collected in the course of providing andpaying for health care can be used by researchers to investigate the relativeeffectiveness of alternative clinical interventions, of alternative methods oforganizing, delivering, and paying for health care, and of a variety of health carepolicies. such research may improve the effectiveness and efficiency of healthcare. for example, hsr has identified significant variation in outcomes of carefor a specific health problem according to the specialty of the clinician, type ofinsurance or reimbursement, and gender or ethnicity of the patient. at the sametime, using personal health information for such research raises concerns aboutprivacy (whether participants should provide the data) and confidentiality (howthe data may be used later). such concerns are intensified because of publicconcerns that confidentiality is being eroded for many types of computerizedpersonal information, ranging from credit card purchases to addresses on drivers'licenses. concerns about maintaining confidentiality of medical information areparticularly important because patients disclose sensitive information tophysicians that they may not tell close relatives and friends, such as informationabout their mental health, alcohol and substance abuse, and sexual practices.confidentiality of medical information used in hsr is particularly importantbecause information on many individuals may be analyzed by researcherswithout their knowledge or consent. the very power of hsr, to juxtaposepatientlevel data from a variety of sources on a large number of patients, alsoraises the largest concernsprefaceviiprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.about confidentiality. it is often not feasible to obtain consent from every patientin a large population to be studied. even if consent were possible to obtain, therequirement of consent would likely lead to bias and invalid findings, becausethose who opt out might differ systematically from those giving consent. thus,for important hsr to proceed, it is important that the privacy and confidentialityof subjects be adequately protected.irbs play a key role in protecting the subjects of research. this iomcommittee was charged with identifing current and best practices of irbs thatreview hsr, both hsr that is subject to federal regulation and research that fallsoutside it. within restrictions of the scope and time, the committee found anumber of examples of irbs that had put into place thoughtful, effectivemeasures for reviewing hsr. there appears to be considerable variation in howirbs deal with such difficult questions as how to distinguish hsr from suchactivities as quality improvement, how to determine whether a hsr project isexempt from irb review, and how to determine whether informed consent can bewaived for a hsr project. if irbs adopted the best practices more widely, thequality of hsr could be improved, and the public could be more assured thatprivacy and confidentiality were being properly safeguarded in hsr.identifying best practices for protecting privacy and confidentiality in hsris a promising approach that needs to be further developed. identifying bestpractices is a quality improvement technique that builds on the achievements ofhsr investigators and irbs on the leading edge of their fields. it stimulates anexplicit discussion of ethical concerns about hsr and potential solutions. bestpractices give irbs the flexibility to respond to the particular issues raised bydifferent hsr projects; a technique that effectively safeguards confidentiality inone hsr project may be inappropriate in another. finally, the approach of bestpractices not only helps to bring everyone up to a higher level, but also raises thebest level higher as improved methods, such as informational technologies,develop and spread.at the same time, the effectiveness of irbs in reviewing hsr will dependon organizational factors. first, authors of gao reports and in the popular presshave noted that irbs often do not have sufficient resources to carry out theircharges. the committee found that irbs will need additional resources andtraining to oversee hsr better, since hsr differs in important ways from clinicalresearch involving new drugs or invasive medical interventions. second,protecting the confidentiality of personal health information in hsr is easier ifhealth care organizations effectively protect confidentiality of electronic personalhealth information, whether used for clinical or administrative purposes. finally,the committee found that many irbs play an important role in educatinginvestigators about the protection of human subjects in hsr. in the long run, sucheducational programs will enhance the quality of hsr proposals submitted forirb review.i was privileged to work with a committee that was so thoughtful,committed, and embodied with good sense. we were grateful to the irb chairsand administrators, health services researchers, and leaders of health careorganizationsprefaceviiiprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.who shared with us their wisdom, experience, and commitment protecting humansubjects. the iom staff was extremely helpful in keeping us on track on a tightschedule. lee zwanziger was excellent in pulling together information and ideasfrom many sources into a coherent, readable report.prefaceixprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsthe workshop speakers, listed in the appendix, all were very helpful andgenerous with their time in preparing, attending, and participating in theworkshop. the committee very much appreciates the information and insight theyprovided both in the workshop and in comments and suggestions afterwards.many individuals assisted with helpful advice and suggestions throughoutthis project. the committee particularly thanks paul clayton of intermountainhealth care, nancy donovan of the u.s. general accounting office, gary ellisand tom puglisi of the (former) oprr, molly greene of uthscsa, erica heathof irc, steve heinig of aamc, jon merz of university of pennsylvania, ericmeslin and margorie speers of the national biothics advisory commission,andy nelson of healthpartners research foundation, erica rose of smithklinebeecham, joan rachlin of prim&r, patricia scannell of washington universityin st. louis, ada sue selwitz of arena, alvan zarate of the national centerfor health statistics, and many others.the committee appreciates the support provided by the sponsors of theproject, the agency for healthcare research and quality (ahrq) and the officeof the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation (aspe), both of thedepartment of health and human services. the individual representatives of thesponsoring agencies, michael fitzmaurice (ahrq) and john fanning (aspe)were very helpful throughout the planning and execution of the workshop.at the institute of medicine, the study director greatly appreciated theassistance of sue barron, jennifer cangco, claudia carl, mike edington, ritagaskins, linda kilroy, janice mehler, jennifer otten, sally stanfield, and vaneevines, among others. florence poillon helped in copy editing the report.acknowledgmentsxiprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proceduresapproved by the national research council's report review committee. thepurpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical commentsthat will assist the institute of medicine in making the published report as soundas possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards forobjectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the reviewcomments and the draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity ofthe deliberative process.ruth s. bulger, ph.d., former president, henry jackson foundation foradvancement of military medicinedonna chen, m.d., assistant director and research scientist, southeasternrural mental health research center, university of virginia health systemhelen mcgough, irb director, human subjects division, university ofwashingtonjoan porter, d.p.a., m.p.h., office of research compliance andassurance, office of veterans affairspatricia scannell, irb director, human studies committee, washingtonuniversityalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions orrecommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.the review of this report was overseen by hugh h. tilson, m.d., dr.p.h., senioradvisor to the dean, university of north carolina school public health, also ofglaxo wellcome company, appointed by the institute of medicine, who wasresponsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report wascarried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all reviewcomments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.acknowledgmentsxiiprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contents executive summary 11 introduction 20 privacy and research 21 health services research 25 benefits of hsr 27 risks of harm from hsr 29 background and policy context 34 project and scope 37 outline of report 392 human subjects protection andhealth services research in federal regulations 40 irbs and human subjects protection 40 previous studies of irbs 47 human subjects protection in hsr 48 principles and practices 493 best practices for irb review ofhealth services research subject to federal regulations 514 best practices for irb or otherreview board oversight ofhealth services research notnecessarily subject to federalregulations 71contentsxiiiprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5 recommendations for next steps 78 references 93 acronyms and abbreviations 99 appendixes a study activities 101b institutional review boards and health servicesresearch data privacy: a workshop summary 106 executive summary 106 introduction 111 workshop summary 119 references 151addendum aš workshop speakers 155addendum bš workshop participants 157c protecting the health services research data ofminors,ross a. thompson 159d confidentiality of health information: international comparative approaches,bartha maria knoppers 173e biographical sketches 187contentsxivprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protecting data privacy in health servicesresearch xvprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summaryour medical system is changing, with choices to be made by consumers,providers, insurers, purchasers, and policy makers at every level of government.the need for quality improvement and for cost saving are driving both individualchoices and health system dynamics. however, no one at any level can makethese choices wisely without research showing the pros and cons of alternatives inhealth services. this information comes from data on the outcomes thatindividuals or organizations experienced with a particular inputšthe selection ofa health plan, drug, or health care delivery model. yet these same data areinformation (often personally identifiable health information) about individuals.most individuals value their privacy and, when they have chosen to sharepersonal information with a health care provider, are then justifiably concernedabout possible breaches in the confidential handling of that information. thehealth services research that we need to support informed choices depends onaccess to data, but at the same time, individual privacy and patientœhealth careprovider confidentiality must be protected.health services research and quality assuranceor improvementhealth services research (hsr) is the study of the effects of using differentmodes of organization, delivery and financing for health care services. moreprecisely, a recent institute of medicine (iom) publication explained, ﬁhealthservices research is a multidisciplinary field of inquiry, both basic and applied,that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery, organization,financing,executive summary1protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and outcomes of health care services to increase knowledge and understanding ofthe structure, processes, and effects of health services for individuals andpopulationsﬂ (iom, 1995). hsr includes studies of the effectiveness of healthcare interventions in realworld settings, as contrasted with studies of the efficacy1of interventions (e.g., new drugs) under controlled settings such as a clinical trial.as an applied field of study, hsr is closely related to nonresearchinvestigations that are directed toward assessing and improving the quality ofoperations in healthcare organizations. indeed, hsr and health care operationsform two ends of a continuous spectrum. some hsr projects are clear examplesof research; applying scientific methods to test hypotheses and produce new,generalizable(("#$"#$((˚˚1the term ﬁefficacyﬂ refers to how reliably an intervention brings about a given resultunder ideal, controlled conditions. the term ﬁeffectivenessﬂ refers to how an interventionperforms in the complex and variable context of realworld use and practice.executive summary2protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.knowledge. other projects are certainly clear examples of internal exercises toassess the quality of the operations of the specific organization with no intentionof producing generalizable knowledge. many of these quality assessment orquality improvement (qa or qi) exercises are never intended to have anyapplication beyond the specific unit within the organization that carries out theoperation. in fact, many projects may start out as operations assessment and thenbecome more like research, and many research projects involve doing very muchwhat would be done in an internal operations assessment. as a result, for manyprojects, it is difficult to decide whether they are more like research, or more likeqa or qi.the benefits to society of hsr studies include increased understanding ofthe results of policy changes and other systemic effects of health care deliverysystems. the major risks to subjects in hsr are not physical risks, such asunknown side effects of new drugs or invasive medical procedures, butpsychosocial and financial risks resulting from improper disclosure of personallyidentifiable health information from the databases. that is, the potential for harmcomes about through possible breaches of confidentiality in handling private andidentifiable health information. examples of the kinds of psychosocial orfinancial risks that may occur include potential denial of health insurancecoverage, difficulty obtaining employment, embarrassment, loss of reputation,legal liability, or anxiety about what the recipient of an unauthorized disclosureof information might do with it.the protection of privacy is a fundamental value in our culture. researchleading to improvements in the delivery and outcomes of health care, however,may be possible only with analysis of databases containing personally identifiablehealth information. privacy can be protected by limiting access to data, orproperly deidentifying the data, and by establishing other strong safeguards toensure confidentiality. hsr can be only conducted if researchers have access todata, so it is important to concentrate on deidentification and other safeguards.we must protect both individual privacy and the societal benefits of research inorder to achieve the appropriate balance. this report aims to highlight somepractices that protect privacy while allowing research access to data.protection of human subjectsthe involvement of living human beings in research as subjects is governedby federal regulations when the research is federally supported or otherwisesubject to federal oversight. the body of federal regulations about humansubjects protection is called the common rule, since it has been adopted ﬁincommonﬂ by many federal departments and agencies that conduct, support, orregulate research with human subjects. each department or agency has codifiedthe common rule in its own specific regulations; this report mainly uses theregulations for the department of health and human services (dhhs) arelocated at title 45 cfr part 46, subpart a, for example.executive summary3protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the main mechanism for protecting research subjects and for assessing thebalance of risks and benefits of research is the institutional review board, or irb(specified in 45 cfr 46). an irb is a standing committee composed ofscientists, physicians, and others not directly involved with the proposal beingreviewed (the irb's membership and function are defined in the regulations toensure that it has sufficient expertise and diversity to provide appropriate review.diversity should include gender, race, culture, and profession. in addition toscientists, the irb must include at least one person who is not otherwiseconnected with the institution and at least one nonscientist.). irbs reviewproposals for research on humans to make sure that risks to subjects areminimized, that the potential benefits of the research outweigh the risks tosubjects, and that the subjects will be respected as persons and not just used asresearch subjects. under federal regulations, irbs are required to ensure thatsubjects first be fully informed of the risks and benefits of the research and thenhave an opportunity to consent or decline to participate in the research unless theirb decides that consent can be waived.when an institution receives federal funds to conduct research involvinghuman subjects, the institution must promise the government that it will operatean irb according to federal research regulations for that research. privatelyfunded research that will be submitted to federal regulatory agencies, such as thefood and drug administration (fda), must also be approved by an irb thatcomplies with federal regulations for the protection of human subjects. theseregulations specify that in order to approve research, the irb must be satisfiedthat among other requirements (45 cfr 46.111), risks to subjects are minimized and are reasonable in relation to anticipatedbenefits, subjects is equitable, consent is obtained to the extent required, and provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain theconfidentiality of data are adequate.irbs face complicated decisions when reviewing hsr and decidingwhether such research is eligible for a waiver of informed consent. hsrprotocols often have characteristics, such as the absence of any physical risk tosubjects, that may make them eligible for a waiver of the informed consentrequirement or even for exemption from irb review. because many hsrprojects depend on secondary analysis of databases of records previouslycollected for another purpose, the investigator may not have the ability to contactthe original subjects, and even if locating them is theoretically possible, thenumber of individuals in question may be far too large to make contacting thempracticable. indeed, many hsr projects could not be carried out if consent wererequired. in such situations, an irb may grant the investigator a waiver ofinformed consent. yet, when the irb reviews hsr, it must make sure thatconfidentiality risks areexecutive summary4protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not overlooked. finally, private organizations do their own hsr or haveprograms such as quality improvement that use similar data and methods; thisresearch may not be covered by the federal regulations and these organizationssometimes do not have irbs.the committee supports the review of all hsr proposals by knowledgeableindividuals who are independent of the researchers. although not all hsr issubject to federal regulations, the committee also concluded that the review ofhsr ought to follow the principles of these regulations. such a review bodymight be designated by any of several titles. the term ﬁirbﬂ is defined in federalregulations and therefore has implications of the extension of federal oversight in anew area. the term ﬁprivacy boardﬂ has been used in a rule that, as this reportwas being written, had been proposed but not finalized, and it may meandifferent things to different people. throughout the report the committee has usedthe term ﬁirbﬂ to refer to formally chartered review bodies that are required tofollow the common rule and other federal regulations. the term ﬁirb or otherreview boardﬂ is used to refer to bodies that review research but are notnecessarily required to follow these federal regulations, although the committeeurges them to follow voluntarily the ethical principles underlying the regulations.good practicesthe objective of this project was to collect, to the extent possible, fromworkshop participants and other contributors, current best practices that irbs andother review bodies employ to review research proposals and to ensure thatprivacy and confidentiality will be maintained within a balance between risk andbenefit. good irb practices should apply the principles of ethical human subjectsresearch and also be feasible for the type of research and the type of organizationin question. that is to say, if we agree that we want to support hsr and obtainthe societal benefits of research, then we must identify and implement practicesthat are feasible but that adequately protect the subjects. the committee hopesthat the practices highlighted in the following chapters will facilitate hsr withappropriate and feasible mechanisms for the protection of human subjects, andwill stimulate the development and dissemination of more advanced practices inthe future.in highlighting the empirical collection of practices, the committeerecognized that good principles are already codified in the federal regulations onhuman subjects protection, but that no amount of codification can provideadequate direction for the daytoday, studybystudy, work of an irb. in short,regulations and guidelines are important to provide norms, but they must still beimplemented with the judgment and practical experience of individuals closest tothe situation. this is what the local irb system is designed to do. the sense ofthe committee is that the local irb system is strong and fully capable ofreviewing hsr for privacy and confidentiality issues. any irb or other reviewbody that reviews hsr will, however, have to understand the special problemsexecutive summary5protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of hsr and how to apply the principles embodied in the federal regulations. theaim of sharing best practices is to support review bodies by compiling the goodideas that have already been developed by irbs and put into practice. onechallenge of the future will be to find the best means of disseminating these goodideas.project and scopethe iom committee on the role of institutional review boards in healthservices research data privacy protection was formed in december 1999 togather data on the current and best practices of irbs in protecting privacy(complete charge is given below). two dhhs agencies, the agency forhealthcare research and quality (ahrq) and the office of the assistantsecretary for planning and evaluation (aspe), sponsored the project.to address these tasks, the iom assembled a 12member committee withexpertise in medical ethics, hsr, irb function, statistics, computer science, law,and database management. the committee met by telephone conference injanuary 2000. the committee and the iom then convened a public workshop inmarch 2000. the committee invited testimony from irb chairs andadministrators, health services researchers, and other officers of academia,government, and private industry (see appendix b). the workshop also featuredpresentations of the drafts of two commissioned papers, one addressing specialconsiderations of hsr and confidentiality when the data pertain to minors (seeappendix c) and the other presenting an international comparison of healthinformation privacy standards (see appendix d). in addition to the workshop, thecommittee posted an invitation on a list serve and on the national academies'website to irbs to contribute information (see appendix a). the committeecollected further information informally by email and telephone. although thecommittee received just a few responses to the posted call for information, thosereceived were very informative. the committee noted that all the providers ofinformation, including respondents to the call for information, those who briefedthe staff by telephone, and participants in the workshop, are a selfselected groupof professionals committed to the irb process. information collection was thusnot systematic and random, but particularly targeted. the committee deliberatedby telephone and email, and in closed meetings in april and may 2000, aboutthe practices described to it. finally, the committee has summarized in this reportthe practices it heard that seemed to be most effective. the committee addressesprivacy and confidentiality pertaining to data used for hsr conducted throughanalyses of preexisting databases. there are many other aspects of the privacy ofelectronic medical records that were beyond the charge of the committee. theinformation in this report howeveršits findings and recommendationsšappliesas well both to data previously collected for another purpose and now beingsecondarily analyzed and to data derived in other ways. the committee chose tofocus its work on studies involving analyses of data already collected for otherpurposes because such studies pose the most difficultexecutive summary6protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethical issues regarding hsr. although hsr that utilizes surveys and interviewsalso raises ethical issues, the contact between researchers and subjects allows thesubjects to learn about the research and decline to participate if they so choose.the committee recognized the strong connections between these related mattersand the question of protecting data privacy in hsr using existing data. thecommittee therefore asks readers to bear in mind that such related matters werenot in its charge and the committee did not address them.the purpose of this project was to provide information and advice to thesponsors on the current and best practices of irbs in protecting privacy in healthservices research. the charge to the committee was given in three parts as shownbelow.1. to gather information on the current practices and principles followed byinstitutional review boards to safeguard the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information used for health services research purposes,in particular, to identify those irb practices that are superior in protectingthe privacy, confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable healthinformation.2. to gather information on the current practices and principles employed inprivately funded health services research studies (that are generally notsubject to irb approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information, and to consider whether and how irbbest practices in this regard might be applied to such privately sponsoredstudies.3. if appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding theconfidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might bevoluntarily applied to health services research projects by irbs andprivate sponsors.recommendationsthis section presents the committee's recommendations and findings basedon the available information from irbs working under federal regulations,discussed in more detail in chapter 3, as well as recommendations from chapter 4,on public and private health care companies that may not have irbs or be subjectto federal regulation. chapter 5 suggests some directions for further work.best practices for irb review of hsr subject to federalregulations (chapter 3)recommendation 31. organizations should work with their irbs todevelop specific guidance and examples on how to interpret key terms in thefederal regulations pertinent to the use in hsr of data previously collectedfor other purposes. such terms include generalizable knowledge, identifiableinformation, minimal risk, and privacy and confidentiality. organizations andtheir irbs should then executive summary7protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.((ˆ˙#˝,*,%˝((ˆ˙#˝ˆ˙#,*/%˝((ˆ˙#((ˆ˙#˚"#$((((ˆ˙#˚(("#$(((("#$((ˆ˙#˚((executive summary8protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.((ˆ˙#((ˆ˙#˚ˆ˙#((((ˆ˙#make such guidance and examples available to all investigators submittingproposals for review.the committee found that several topics cause considerable worry toinvestigators and irbs because federal regulations are open to varyinginterpretations, with divergent implications. the first of these topics is what activities are considered research and whatcriteria are used to operationalize the distinction between research and otheractivities. a key feature of the federal definition of research is whether theactivity contributes to generalizable knowledge. in trying to distinguishresearch from activities such as quality improvement that use similartechniques to analyze personally identifiable health information in databases,however, both the federal regulations and the interpretations of theseregulations by the office of human research protections (ohrp, formerlythe office for protection from research risks, or oprr) containinsufficient practical guidance for investigators and irbs.executive summary9protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. a second important issue is what constitutes identifiable information asdefined in the federal regulations. should data be considered unidentifiable iflinked to codes in such a way that the investigator would have great difficultyreestablishing the identity of subjects? a third issue is what constitutes minimal risk in hsr research and, inparticular, what steps to protect confidentiality of data in hsr suffice toallow the project to be considered as minimal risk. the issues of identifiableinformation and minimal risk have important implications for whether aproject may be exempt from irb review or receive expedited review orwhether informed consent of research participants may be waived. thecommittee felt that it would be desirable that all such research proposalsreceive some outside review.on all of these issues, irbs should communicate more directly withinvestigators and give examples more specific than the guidance currentlyavailable in federal regulations and clarifications by ohrp. clearer guidancewould make irb review more efficient as well as enhance the protection ofsubjects by helping to ensure that hsr projects incorporate confidentialityprotections that the reviewers find important.recommendation 32. irbs should develop and disseminate principles,policies, and best practices for investigators regarding privacy andconfidentiality issues in hsr that makes use of personal health datapreviously collected for other uses.confidentiality in handling health information is important for its own sakeand for the enhancement of public trust in research. the committee heard severalinnovative and feasible ways to facilitate the maintenance of confidentiality. thecommittee found, however, that the possible identifiability of data in hsr is acontinuum, such that absolute guarantees of confidentiality are impossible.many techniques work together to increase the safety of confidential data,including protecting the data from unauthorized access by tracking who reviewsthe file, storing identifying information or codes separately from the rest of thedata, and protecting the data from being physically lost, stolen, or surreptitiouslycopied.recommendation 33. irbs should redesign applications and forms (paperand electronic) tailored to hsr that analyzes data originally collected forother purposes and then distribute them widely (e.g., post them online) toassist investigators in writing the human subjects sections of their hsrproposals and in preparing applications for irb review. irbs should beknowledgeable about the differences between hsr and clinical research,and any forms developed should reflect these differences.executive summary10protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a checklist or logical series of questions lays out the criteria that theinstitution has adopted to determine, for example, what constitutes research.these instruments are useful in several ways: they call the attention ofinvestigators to ethical issues arising in hsr, and they help investigators to thinkthrough systematically the specific issues regarding irb review, patient consent,and protection confidentiality. here, for example, is one approach to classifying aproject along the hsr to qaœqi spectrum:the following are characteristics of projects using hsr methods that areresearch, not qa or qi:explores previously unknown phenomena. it collects information beyond that routinely collected for the patient care inquestion.compares alternative treatments, interventions, or processes.manipulates a current process. results are expected to be published for general societal benefit.recommendation 34. irbs should have expertise available (either on thecommittee or through consultants) to evaluate the risks to confidentialityand security in hsr involving data previously collected for some otherpurpose, including the risks of identification of individuals and the physicaland electronic security of data.many of the techniques mentioned can be highly technical and are evolvingrapidly. in order to confirm that confidentiality will be protected in a protocol, thereviewers will have to have access either to members or to consultants who canadvise them on whether the proposal includes feasible technical measures toprotect the data or whether the proposal has overlooked some potentialconfidentiality risks. this training should include crosscultural issues related todefinitions of privacy of personal, family and group information, depending onthe specifics of how such crosscultural questions arise in the local situation.recommendation 35. institutions that carry out hsr and train healthservices researchers should require that trainees, investigators, and irbmembers receive education, with updates as technology changes, regardingthe protection of privacy and confidentiality when using data previouslycollected for another use.education is critical not only for irb members, but also for researchers,technicians, and any other employees who may come into contact with personallyidentifiable health information. better education about how to protectconfidentiality and possible sources of risk will help investigators design betterconfidentiality protection for their proposed studies from the start. bettereducationexecutive summary11protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of all employees who may come in contact with the data will help raise the levelof understanding and alertness throughout the organization.recommendation 36. health care or other organizations that disclose oruse personally identifiable health information for any purpose includingresearch or other activities using hsr methods should have comprehensivepolicies, procedures and other structures to protect the confidentiality ofhealth information and should have in place appropriate strong andenforceable sanctions against breaches of health informationconfidentiality.access to specific expertise and enhanced general education are important,but the committee also observed that the human element of the researchenterprise necessarily includes human potential for error and even malfeasance.therefore organizations should complement and support the proactive strategiesof expertise and education for better confidentiality protection with deterrents towrongdoing. such sanctions should be graded according to the offense (e.g.,whether the incident was a simple mistake or intentional violation) and shouldapply not only to researchers but to all employees of the organization.best practices for review of hsr not necessarily subject tofederal regulation (chapter 4)a good deal of health services research is carried out by organizations thatdo not receive federal funds for research and are not subject to federalregulations. these same organizations are dedicated to delivering health careservices and products, so they also engage in quality assessment and qualityimprovement projects. these activities may involve very similar methods anduses of data, but they may not be classified as research.the committee was impressed with the commitment to privacy andconfidentiality that the representatives of several private companies presented atthe workshop. companies appear to be at different stages of developing internalprivacy or confidentiality policies regarding hsr and should be encouraged tocontinue to develop these organizational policies and procedures.recommendation 41. researchers should have all hsr reviewed by an irbor other review board regardless of the source of support or whether theresearch is subject to pertinent federal regulations.recommendation 42. irbs and other boards that review hsr that is notsubject to federal regulation should assess their practices in comparisonwith the best practices of irbs working under pertinent federal regulationsand, when the latter offer improvements, adopt them. alternatively, whentheir own practices are superior thoughexecutive summary12protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not subject to federal regulation, they should share them with irbsapplying the common rule.irbs offer a review of research projects by knowledgeable persons notdirectly associated with the project. this independent review protects subjects ofresearch because independent reviewers may identify concerns and suggest waysto minimize risks that were not apparent to investigators. the committee heardseveral examples of protocols that were or could have been substantiallyimproved with respect to confidentiality by relatively simple modifications, forexample, omitting identifying data in the record, such as a social securitynumber, that was not actually necessary for the research. research subjects, whoundergo risks for the benefit of science and society as a whole, should have theprotections of such independent review as a matter of ethical best practice,regardless of funding source. there is little ethical justification for making adistinction between the level of protection afforded subjects in federally fundedprojects and that given subjects in projects funded by private sources if the risksto these subjects are comparable.as in recommendation 32, irbs or other review bodies should developlists of points to consider on protecting privacy and confidentiality in hsr for useby investigators. as noted in recommendation 33, the committee suggests thatthe development and online posting of applications and review forms specificallydesigned for hsr would improve the quality of review of hsr projects. irbsand other review bodies in any setting should inform themselves about thedifferences between hsr and clinical research, and any forms developed shouldreflect these differences. as mentioned in recommendation 34, irbs or similarreview bodies should have available expertise (either on the committee or throughconsultants) to evaluate the risks to confidentiality and security in hsr, includingthe risks of identification of individuals and the physical security of data. also, asstated in recommendation 35, organizations should require that researchers andother employees who come in contact with confidential health informationreceive education in the handling of this information to maintain confidentiality.recommendation 43. health care organizations that conduct projectsapplying the methods of hsr to personally identifiable health informationfor purposes such as qa or qi, disease management, and core businessfunctions as well as for research should have comprehensive policies,procedures, and other structures to protect health privacy when personallyidentifiable health information is used for research or other purposes.recommendation 44. health care or other organizations that disclose oruse personally identifiable health information for any purpose including qaor qi, disease management, and core business functions as well as forresearch should have in place appropriate,executive summary13protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strong, and enforceable sanctions against breaches of the confidentiality ofhealth information.the members of the committee agreed that previous experience providesample evidence that, although most investigators and staff are upstanding, therewill always be a few who are subject to the temptation to misuse access toconfidential information or who maintain records in an insecure manner. in fact,the committee felt that this aspect of human subjects protection may have beenneglected and therefore recommends consideration of deterrent policies both fororganizations working with irbs under the common rule and for those that donot.large health care organizations reported that most violations ofconfidentiality occurred outside the research arena, in such areas as clinical careand business activities. this distribution is not surprising because most uses ofpersonally identifiable health information are in these nonresearch areas. fromthe viewpoint of the patient, it does not matter whether a violation ofconfidentiality occurs in a research project or other activity because the risks ofbeing harmed or wronged may be the same.recommendations for next steps (chapter 5)ﬁthe end of this study will not be the end of studying [the issue of privacyand confidentiality in health services research],ﬂ said dr. michael fitzmaurice ofahrq, one of the sponsoring agencies, during the committee's workshop. thecommittee appreciated that the charge of this particular study was focused andaccordingly endeavored to stay strictly within the charge. in the course of thestudy, however, the committee found many important questions that would seemto be answerable in practical terms, although doing so would be far beyond thescope of this report. the present project has, however, brought these other issuesinto a new sharper focus. the committee's suggestions for further work and futuresteps may communicate this vision to others.recommendation 51. institutions whose irbs or other review boardsreview hsr should ensure adequate administrative support and fundingfor review bodies and should incorporate improving review operations intooverall institutional strategic planning, and organizations that sponsor hsrshould also support designating adequate funds for such review.the committee corroborated previous reports that questioned whether irbshave the resources to carry out their mission. the committee noted especially theapril 2000 update report of the dhhs office of the inspector general (oig).this report, protecting human research subjects: status of recommendations,concluded that the resource problems identified in the oig's 1998 report,institutional review boards: a time for reform, still exist. the committeeexecutive summary14protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.heard that many irbs already have a heavy workload of proposals for review,and that most members serve in a voluntary capacity. in addition, the practicesthat the committee heard and believes can be positive facilitators of irb qualityand efficiency in the review of hsr will require investment on the part of theirb's institutional home in computer equipment, applications development, andexpertise to support these programs and advise the organization.recommendation 52. the dhhs and other federal departments andprivate organizations such as the association of american medicalcolleges, the association for health services research (now the academyfor health services research and health policy), the american college ofepidemiology, the international society for pharmacoepidemiology, publicresponsibility in medicine and research, the applied research ethicsnational association, and others should continue or expand educationalefforts regarding the protection of the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information in research.while these recommendations highlight dhhs as the sponsor of this studyand a major sponsor of relevant research, the recommendations should be appliedby other common rule signatory departments and agencies as well. thecommittee believes that the approach of identifying best practices for irboversight of hsr is a fruitful one that should to be further developed.recommendations of best practices will provide more specific guidance toinvestigators and irb members than is currently available, and irbs willcontinue to devise additional good practices. this approach draws its strengthfrom the commitment both of irb members and administrators and ofresearchers to protecting the rights and welfare of the subjects of hsr. bothirbs and scientists have developed useful practices that, if more widely adopted,could lead to improved protection of confidentiality and privacy, without creatingundue burdens.recommendation 53. organizations that furnish health servicesresearchers with personally identifiable health information should ensurethat the data are prepared in a manner that protects confidentialityadequately.the committee heard several instances reported at the workshop where hsrinvestigators requested deidentified data from federal agencies but received datathat had not been deidentified because the agency in question lacked theresources to do so.as large holders of personally identifiable data, federal agencies should notbe in the situation of having to choose between providing data that have not beendeidentified, or simply refusing to provide data for research at all. organizationsholding personally identifiable health data should develop and/or implementexecutive summary15protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lists of points to consider in reviewing data requests with respect to protectingprivacy and confidentiality in hsr.recommendation 54. the funders of hsr should be willing to cover thecost of preparing personally identifiable health information that is collectedin clinical care, billing, or payment so that confidentiality can be adequatelyprotected in hsr.recommendation 55. the dhhs should continue and expand efforts toencourage holders of personally identifiable health information to make thisinformation available to researchers as public use files after suitableapplication of techniques to minimize the risks of identifiability.if an organization holding health data has made a dataset publicly availablewithout restriction, as is done with the national health interview survey (nhis),then projects using only such data can be considered minimal risk and eligible forexemption per 45 cfr 46.101(b)(5). in order to promote hsr, dataholdingorganizations should consider making as much data available in the publicdomain as is safely possible. the committee notes that the interagencyconfidentiality and data access group (affiliated with the federal committee onstatistical methodology) has developed a checklist for use in consideringwhether data may be released, which helps holders of data develop such publicuse files.2recommendation 56. the ahrq should consider supporting a feasibilitystudy on developing procedures for facilitating linkage of separate data filescontaining sensitive data from different sources to create analytical filessuch that it would be possible for researchers to create linkages that arereliable and informative, and at the same time, to protect the confidentialityof the original data disclosure through deidentification and otherprotective measures so as to save the subject from being placed at risk ofharm or wrong through improper reidentification.much of the value of retrospective, databaseoriented research comes fromthe ability to draw inferences from data derived from different sources. thecommittee urges interested parties, including dhhs agencies, to encourageresearch on linkage and anonymization with a view toward two goals: first, itshould be possible for researchers to create linkages that are reliable andinformative, and second, we should approach as closely as possible the goal of2confidentiality and data access committee, federal committee on statisticalmethodology. checklist on disclosure potential of proposed data releases (july 1999):http://www.fcsm.gov/spwptbco.html.executive summary16protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.anonymized data. ideally then, the various sources of data would have theirrecords indexed by the same set of identifiers, but ones that are not easilyreassociated with the actual patient's identity. there are several possible ways toaddress this problem. one suggestion exploits developing cryptographic andauthentication technology to create flexible health information identificationsystems (as explored in a pilot study of kohane et al., 1998). another type oflinkage system would depend on trusted third parties with no interest in eitherdata collection or the research project to be responsible for linking the separatedata files. these entities could hold the keys linking individuals to the data. aftermerging datasets, this entity would then strip off the identifiers, check thatidentification cannot be (reasonably) inferred,3 and take any needed steps toprotect the data. there are positive and negative aspects to either approach, so thefeasibility of both should be further tested.recommendation 57. dhhs (ahrq and/or the nih) should considerdeveloping and supporting a research agenda concerning irb protection ofsubjects from nonphysical harms such as risks to privacy andconfidentiality in human subjects research (including cultural meanings ofprivacy and confidentiality).a systematic study of nonphysical risk assessment was beyond the chargegiven to this iom committee, and the committee would in any case have founditself unable to accomplish it due to time limitations and rules of the office ofmanagement and budget requiring additional clearance for extensive surveys.the committee found, however, that such information would be of great use bothas a baseline and, if updated periodically, as a basis of continuous policyevaluation. such a research agenda would likely include current irb practice aswell as new procedures and policies to provide better human subjects protectionand also would include monitoring of irb practices. the findings would be ofuse to irbs, researchers, regulators, and any other parties interested in privacyand confidentiality.recommendation 58. the ohrp should review the possibility of proposinga change to the regulations with respect to hsr to replace the termsﬁexemptﬂ and ﬁexpediteﬂ with ﬁadministrative review.ﬂthe committee is recommending this only with respect to hsr, not havinginvestigated possible consequences for other types of research. the committeeheard several reports that wellintentioned and conscientious researchers mayjudge a study to be exempt from review under the current regulatory language andtherefore never bring it to the attention of a review board. since the committee3the committee recognizes that the question of how difficult identifiability by inferencemust be in order to make data safe for release will continue to be a matter of debate andnotes that the standard should be expected to change as technology changes.executive summary17protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.has concluded that all hsr should receive some review by a board that isindependent of the research project, the committee suggests that this possiblymisleading terminology be avoided. the committee recognizes, however, that achange to the common rule involves coordination among many agencies. thecommittee further recognizes that others may have other suggestions for a newterm. the committee's goal in this matter was to offer a term that recognized thatsome studies do not need full irb review but does not seem to suggest that theinvestigator should decide what level of irb review is needed.recommendation 59. health services researchers, and institutions thatparticipate in and benefit from hsr, should voluntarily adopt bestpractices for irb review of hsr.the committee found that some nations have adopted laws or regulationsthat allow individuals to exclude their personally identifiable health informationfrom databases, that require written consent from patients for use of healthrecords for research, and that require the anonymization of data for use in anysecondary data analysis. such measures were enacted to protect privacy and theconfidentiality of computerized personally identifiable health information.if patients and members of the public in general do not find that they cantrust that confidential information will be protected throughout research, they mayseek further measures to protect confidentiality that could be detrimental to hsr.the committee therefore urges investigators, data users, and data holders andpublishers voluntarily to adopt and continually upgrade the best practices of irbsand other review boards in ensuring the protection of data privacy andconfidentiality in hsr.recommendation 510. all stakeholders in hsr should support strategies toimprove the protection of privacy and confidentiality without impedingresearch.the committee found it necessary to at least contemplate additional areas forstudy. although there was not time in this project to explore widerranging ideas,the committee suggests several as potential starting points in a multifacetedstrategy to improve the awareness of privacy issues and improve confidentialityprotection practices. federal departments including the dhhs could sponsor a conference toinclude hsr journal editors and editorial boards to consider special issuesdevoted to data privacy and adoption or strengthening of policies againstpublishing research without evidence of prior assessment by an irb or otherreview board. dhhs and other federal departments and agencies, as well as foundationsand state and local granting agencies, could consider possible changes inproceexecutive summary18protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dure including revising grant application guidelines and contract proposals toinclude a section on confidentiality protection and to include privacy expertson peer review panels. funders of hsr including dhhs or other federal departments, foundations,accrediting agencies, health maintenance organizations and privatecompanies could consider supporting research on data protection methods. organizations interested in data privacy and highquality hsr could sponsora prize competition for best practices in protecting privacy andconfidentiality.the methods of hsr, applied to data previously collected for otherpurposes, have been useful in discovering and demonstrating systemic effects andpopulationlevel trends in the organization and delivery of health services. it isimportant that we, as a society, continue to have access to such research in orderto inform policy making in both private and governmental arenas. at the sametime, it is important that we, as a society, protect the privacy of individuals and ofvulnerable groups, and the confidentiality of information that patients share withhealth care providers. as a result of the present study, the committee hasconcluded that it is possible both to carry out valuable hsr and to protectconfidentiality. however, to do so will require adequate funding. resources areneeded to support dedicated, trained irb members and staff, to establishorganizational confidentiality policies and electronic security practices, to educateresearchers, and to provide statistical and computer expertise. the true test of ourcommitment to the twin values of advancing useful knowledge and protectingconfidentiality is whether we are willing to make the needed investments toachieve both goals.executive summary19protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introductionhealth services research (hsr), through the analysis of large databases ofhealth information, offers the potential to improve the quality of health caredelivery and the effectiveness of health care policies. at the same time, theanalysis of personally identifiable health information from many individualsraises concerns about privacy and confidentiality. we need to protect theindividual subjects of study (where participation in the study may, but will notnecessarily, benefit these subjects) by taking measures that are reliable, but arealso compatible with good research that can benefit society as a whole. ensuringboth values is particularly important at this time because of policy debates abouthealth privacy and the confidentiality of computerized health information, andrecent criticisms about the effectiveness of institutional review boards (irbs) inprotecting research subjects, although much of the recent criticism has actuallyfocused on clinical trials.1this project charged the institute of medicine (iom) with gatheringinformation on current practices and principles followed by irbs that reviewhsr, both under the federal regulations and in privately sponsored studies. inaddition, the iom was asked to recommend, if appropriate, best practices forsafeguarding the confidentiality of personally identifiable health information inhsr.this introductory chapter summarizes the context of the issue of privacy andconfidentiality in health services research, including the background of the1regarding policy and confidentiality, see for example applebaum, 2000; iom, 1994;nrc 1997; etzioni, 1999; gostin and hadley, 1998; hanken, 1996; ghpp, 1999;goldman, 1998. regarding irb effectiveness, see for example brown (oig), 1998b,2000; brainard, 2000; gao, 1996; edger and rothman, 1995.introduction20protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.study, irbs, hsr and privacy, and the scope and limitations of the currentproject. this chapter closes with an overview of the remaining chapters of thereport. the remaining chapters describe some current and best practices that thecommittee learned of pertaining to the protection of confidentiality through theapplication of technology, implementation of informed policies, and training andsupport of personnel. finally, the report suggests further steps that would lead toadditional improvements in protection of the confidentiality of hsr, while at thetime making oversight by irbs (or other review boards) more effective andefficient. in this report, ﬁeffective oversightﬂ includes the idea that the oversightwill be trusted throughout our diversified society and reliable and, thus, able tobalance societal benefit and individual privacy. effective oversight will thereforebe an efficient means toward allowing valuable hsr to proceed.privacy and researchfederal policies on the protection of human subjects in all types of researchrest on irb review of the research proposals and protocols, and on obtaining theinformed consent of subjects. both apply somewhat differently in hsr than inclinical research, which increases the scope and complexity of research oversightin general. irb review is complicated because hsr studies often havecharacteristics that cause studies not to require full irb review and discussion.on the other hand, such independent review of these studies may help ensure thatconfidentiality is adequately protected. the regulations allowing irbs to exemptstudies from full review are described in more detail in chapter 2. ﬁexemptionﬂis a formal term in the regulations applied to studies that have such minimalimpact on the subjects that no further oversight by an irb is needed. forsituations of somewhat more, but still small, impact, the proposal might receiveexpedited review from just one or a few members rather than the entire reviewboard. in general, an irb representative makes the determination of whether aproject might be eligible for exemption or expedited review. informed consent iscomplicated because many hsr projects involving analysis of personal healthdata collected previously for another purpose are eligible for waiver of informedconsent. indeed obtaining informed consent is not feasible for many hsrprojects.the methods of hsr are varied and may include not only secondaryanalysis of previously collected data, but also primary data collection throughsurveys and interviews. this report focuses on the secondary analysis of data,including personal health information, that have already been collected for someother purpose, because this type of analysis raises the most challenging ethicalissues. in research where investigators collect primary data through surveys andinterviews, the subject knows that research is being conducted, can find out moreabout the research, and has an opportunity to decline to participate. by contrast,in secondary analyses of the type described, individuals may not know that theyare subjects of research and may not have the opportunity to decline toparticipate. the researchers also may be unable to identify subjects individuallyand, thus, unable to contact themintroduction21protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for consent. some people may, however, object if researchers have access to theirhealth information without their knowledge or consent.the committee recognized that important privacy and confidentialityconcerns also arise in other forms of research using previously collected data(e.g., research using archival tissue specimens) and in many types of research inwhich new data are collected. each of these areas merits careful study and thedissemination and adoption of best practices for protecting confidentiality.indeed, the committee affirms that all personally identifiable health information,no matter how it was collected or for what purpose, should be treated so as torespect privacy and maintain confidentiality. this report reflects the committee'sspecific charge to focus on the analysis of existing data used in hsr aftercollection for another purpose.privacy and confidentialityjustice louis brandeis' reference to ﬁthe right to be left aloneﬂ (olmstead v.u.s., 1928) stands as a vivid and succinct definition of privacy in general, but forthe purposes of this study, definitions more focused on information should beconsidered (box 11).2for the purposes of hsr, privacy can be understood as a person's ability torestrict access to information about him or herself. privacy is valued becauserespecting privacy in turn respects the autonomy of persons, protects againstsurveillance or intrusion, and allows individuals to control the dissemination anduse of information about themselves. privacy fosters and enhances a sense of selfand also promotes the development of character traits and close relationships(iom, 1994). the federal regulations governing human research (45 cfr 46.102(f)) discuss privacy in the following terms:private information includes information about behavior that occurs in a contextin which an individual can reasonably expect that no observation or recording istaking place, and information which has been provided for specific purposes byan individual and which the individual can reasonably expect will not be madepublic (for example, a medical record). private information must be individuallyidentifiable (i.e., the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained bythe investigator or associated with the information) in order for obtaining theinformation to constitute research involving human subjects.the regulations thus characterize privacy in terms of the expectations of thepersons whose personally identifiable health information is being discussed andstipulate that the information must be specifically associated with the individualin order for the individual to have a legitimate interest in protecting it. individualsmay, however, be harmed or wronged by information associated with themprobabalistically as well as specifically identifiable information.2lowrance, 1997; nrc, 1997; buckovich, et al., 1999; oprr, 1993; bradburn, 2000.introduction22protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.confidentiality refers to controlling access to the information that anindividual has already disclosed, for example, a patient to a treating physician orto an insurance company paying for care. confidentiality is a major expression ofrespect for persons, the person who has trusted the health care provider withprivate information in the belief that the information will be guardedappropriately and used only for that person's benefit. maintaining confidentialityis considered important also because it encourages patients to seek needed careand to discuss sensitive topics candidly with their physicians. if patients do notbelieve they can trust their health care providers to maintain confidentiality, theymay withhold information to the detriment of the best medical judgment and carethey might receive. confidentiality is violated if the person or institution to whominformation is disclosed fails to protect it adequately or discloses itinappropriately without the patient's consent. the dilemma about hsr is thatpersonally identifiable health information that is disclosed or collected for onepurpose (clinical care, billing, etc.) is then used without consent for a differentpurpose (improving the state of knowledge to benefit future and current patients).confidentiality is also important to the continued success and vitality of thehsr effort. just as in the case of medical treatment, research subjects maywithhold information if they do not have confidence that what they disclose willbe protected. further, it is crucial to the hsr effort that researchers designstudies so that the risk of harm to subjects is minimal, in order to allow theprotocol to qualify for a waiver of the informed consent requirement. hsrprojects often apply methods to large databases of previously collectedinformation where individual informed consent would be impracticable orimpossible. the effect of losing the population's trust in confidentiality may haveserious repercussions both for the effective quality of medical care and for thequality of medical records research. a 1999 poll by the california healthcarefoundation (chcf, 1999) found that approximately one in five respondentsbelieved their personal medical information to have been improperly disclosed bya health care provider, insurance plan, government agency, or employer.approximately one in((((((((˚˚introduction23protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.six respondents said they had taken some extra precautions to make sure thatmedical information about them remained confidential, including paying out ofpocket, giving false information, and avoiding care. these figures have beeninterpreted both as alarmingly large and as reassuringly small. in either case, thenumbers do suggest that there is significant potential for the reliability ofpersonally identifiable health information data to decrease if the population'strust that the confidentiality of personally identifiable health information will bemaintained decreases.benefits and risks of harm in researchall research on human subjects raises ethical concerns because participantsin research undergo risks of potential harm primarily, if not solely, for the benefitof others. balancing benefit and risk of harm is an essential part of the design ofany human subjects research. physicians are familiar with the ethical obligation tobalance benefits and risks when providing clinical care. however, in clinical carethe patient both directly benefits from interventions and directly accepts the risks.research, on the other hand, is not intended to benefit the subjects directly,because we actually do not know which treatment is best, so it is even moreimportant in research to ensure that the risks are acceptable in proportion to thelikely benefits, and that the risks are minimized. indeed, these ethical principlesare at the core of federal regulations on research human subjects.federal regulationsfederal regulations govern human subjects research when the research isfederally supported or regulated (e.g., by the food and drug administration). thebody of federal regulations about human subjects protection (45 cfr 46 subparta) is called the common rule, since it has been adopted ﬁin commonﬂ by manyfederal departments and agencies that are involved in research with humansubjects. the food and drug administration (fda) has adopted similarregulations tailored to its functions (21 cfr 50 and 56) (this report uses thegeneral term ﬁfederal regulationsﬂ to refer all cfr sections dealing with humansubjects protection). in addition, organizations that carry out many projects thatare federally funded and involve human subjects can negotiate multiple projectassurances (mpas) with the office of human research protections (ohrp,formerly the office for protection from research risks or oprr). mostorganizations holding mpas agree to carry out all their research according tofederal regulations, regardless of whether all the research is intrinsically subjectto common rule regulation.in the federal regulations, the irb of a particular organization is chargedwith reviewing and approving all research covered by the regulations that isproposed under the auspices of the organization (note, however, that theresponsibility for ensuring compliance falls to the organization, not upon the irbitself).introduction24protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in order to approve research, the irb must be satisfied that, among otherrequirements (45 cfr 46.111): risks to subjects are minimized and are reasonable in relation to anticipatedbenefits, subjects is equitable, consent is obtained to the extent required, and provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and to maintain theconfidentiality of data are adequate.health services researchhealth services research is the study of the effects of different modes oforganization, delivery, and financing of health care services (see box 12). hsrincludes studies of the effectiveness of health care interventions in realworldsettings, as contrasted with studies of the efficacy3 of interventions undercontrolled settings such as a clinical trial.hsr raises particular issues regarding the protection of human subjects thatdiffer from the problems of clinical research, just as the methods of hsr differfrom the methods of clinical research.4 first, many hsr projects involveminimal risk of harm to subjects, so they may qualify for a waiver of informedconsent and individual informed consent is often impractical or impossible inhsr projects.5 for example, an hsr project may carry out secondary analyses ofdata previously collected in the delivery of patient care or the payment for suchcare. if the subjects whom the project will involve are enrollees in the federalmedicare program, the number of subjects may be as many as several millionindividuals. further, many hsr projects use data that are already public and deidentified, so they may qualify for exemption from irb review or for expeditedreview. finally, many private organizations do hsršor programs such asquality improvement that use similar data and methodsšnot covered by thefederal regulations. these organizations may not have irbs.3the term ﬁefficacyﬂ refers to how reliably an intervention brings about a given resultunder ideal, controlled conditions. the term ﬁeffectivenessﬂ refers to how an interventionperforms in the complex and variable context of realworld use and practice.4there are other fields of research such as epidemiology, however, that share with hsrsimilar methods and databases but evaluate different public health questions, (e.g. thefrequency of rare medication side effects). although not examined here, the practicesreviewed by the committee for hsr would likely apply in these other fields.5informed consent is not always feasible for clinical trials either: fda regulations at 21cfr 50.24 allow for the use of investigational drugs without informed consent undercertain conditions such as cases where the subject's condition is immediately lifethreatening, the subject is not able to participate in giving consent, time does not permitseeking proxy consent, and no alternative approved or generally recognized therapy isavailable.introduction25protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.since the object of hsr includes the study of health care operations andhsr uses many of the same methods used in health care operations units toassess their own performance, hsr is fundamentally connected to nonresearchinvestigations within heath care organizations.the committee heard one account describing the situation as a continuum,with hsr at one end of the scale and operations at the other end (see figure 3 inappendix b). some hsr projects are clear examples of research; applyingscientific methods to test hypotheses and produce new, generalizable knowledge.other projects are certainly clear examples of internal exercises to assess thequality of the operations of the specific organization with no intention ofproducing generalizable knowledge. at the same time, quality assessment andquality improvement (qa and qi) exercises sometimes reveal interesting andimportant data that the organization recognizes to be of general interest, and thattherefore ought to be published. in addition, both scientific research in healthservices and investigations into the internal operation of a health servicesorganization use many of the same methods (e.g., chart review, database analysisand linkage).in fact, many projects may start out as operations assessment and thenbecome more like research, and many research projects involve doing very muchwhat would be done in an internal operations assessment. this continuum is oneof the interesting, if problematic, features of hsr. the committee proceeded witha view to the clearer cases of research in health services, always mindful of theless clear cases and closely related operations assessment exercises. from thepoint of view of the patient or subjectšthe person whose personally identifiablehealth information may be reviewed or usedšthe continuum appears more like awidening circle of disclosure. at the center is the individual and healthinformation not yet shared with anyone; then, according to etzioni's description(etzioni, 1999), comes the inner circle of those with whom the individual sharesinformation because they will use the information directly in the care˚introduction26protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 11 circles of disclosure. source: adapted from etzioni 1999.of that individual. next comes the intermediate circle of payers, and finallythe widest circle of everyone else who may have an interest in the individual'shealth information (but with whom the individual may or may not have aninterest in sharing the information [figure 11]).the clearest examples of qa and qi occur in organizations involved inhealth care delivery or payment. in many such assessments, individual patientcases have to be reviewed. for example, if an organization is trying to reducedrug errors in the hospital or shorten the length of stay after coronary bypasssurgery, for example, it may need to review the medical records of individualpatients to get a clear idea of how the process of care might be improved.furthermore, when a health care organization is investigating a ﬁcritical incidentﬂin which an error occurred, the qa committee will have to review the individualcase in detail. hsr studies generally do not require investigators to know allpersonal information about each individual subject, but they often do requirepreservation of linkages (via consistent code numbers) across data files forindividuals.benefits of hsrhsr can lead to improvements in the delivery and organization of healthcare, which may in turn improve health outcomes, and the costeffectiveness ofcare, for patients. it addresses largescale systemic effects of health care deliverychanges that are difficult if not impossible to understand at the level of theindividual citizen, consumer, or patient. this kind of information is important forplanners and policy developers in both government and the health care industry.it is also increasingly important for both corporate and individual consumers ofhealth care services (clancy and eisenberg, 1998; eisenberg, 1998). our healthcare system is incorporating greater reliance on market decisions to improvequality and control costs, but these decisions can be made well only with accessto good information about different health care services options. hsr providesobjective data on questions about the effectiveness of institutional variables, justintroduction27protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as clinical trials assess the efficacy of interventions in individuals. hsr projectsaim at a variety of levels of the health care system. some examples follow.policy assessment wellintentioned public policies may have unanticipatedadverse consequences or fail to fulfill their goals. however, whether they aremeeting or missing their goals, it is often difficult to assess their outcomeswithout a systematic examination. hsr generates data on the outcomes of publicpolicies and provides an empirical base for modification or refinement of thesepolicies. for example, gross et al. (1998) compared previously collected datafrom several sources (including the medicare current beneficiary survey) toestimate outofpocket health care spending by lowerincome medicarebeneficiaries. the authors found that although medicaid provides significantprotection for some lowerincome medicare beneficiaries, outofpocket healthcare spending continues to be a substantial burden for most of this population.this fact may be important in considering policies that would depend on furthercost shifting to increase outofpocket expenditure. in another example,cromwell et al. (1998) compared data over a fouryear period on medicaid antiulcer drug claims, medicaid eligibility, and acute care nonfederal hospitaldischarges to assess what effect a policy of restricting reimbursement formedicaid antiulcer drugs had on the use of these drugs and on peptic ulcerrelated hospitalizations. following implementation of the policy, reimbursementsfor the drugs decreased 33 percent but there was no associated increase in the rateof medicaid peptic ulcerrelated hospitalizations. these results opened furtherresearch questions because there may have been qualityoflife implications forsome patients that the study did not address. addressing these questions hasimportant public policy implications.outcome predictors the question of whether it makes a difference to have aprocedure done in a hospital that has a high case load of similar procedures isimportant to policy makers and to individuals who may need an operation. hsrstudies have demonstrated in several cases that centers performing a greatervolume of procedures have better patient outcomes. norton et al. (1998)examined the effects of case volume on outcomes for knee replacement surgeryusing medicare claims data and found the results so striking that theyrecommended against expanding knee replacement surgery to new centersgenerally and instead recommended concentrating on developing hub centers.other groups of investigators have examined the relationship between volumeand outcomes in coronary interventions, where the inverse relation betweenvolume and mortality has been known for two decades. this does not mean thatnew information is not important in changing policy, however. sollano et al.(1999) investigated the outcomes in several new york hospitals of three types ofoperations and found that although the relationship (high volume associated withlower mortality) persisted in two, it no longer held true for the third, coronaryartery bypass grafting. the authors attribute the disappearance of the relationshipin this operation to a recent quality improvement program in bypass operations inthe region, with important implications for the effects of qi programs in general.onintroduction28protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a similar note, malenka et al. (1999) showed that for one type of surgery(percutaneous coronary interventions), the operator did not have to do as manyprocedures per year to maintain top performance as had previously beenbelieved, which they attributed to changes in practice due to new devices anddrugs.provider practices hsr develops data on physician behavior and practices.zito et al. (2000) recently demonstrated a significant overall increase in the rateof prescriptions of psychotropic drugs for preschoolaged children (using datafrom two state medicaid programs and a salaried groupmodel healthmaintenance organization [hmo]), which is of note in part because there are fewcontrolled clinical trials of the safety and efficacy of such drugs in this young agegroup.hsr studies also help identify factors that may predict underuse of servicesthat are known to be beneficial. hsr has shown that patients who have survivedone heart attack also are known to have lower mortality if they receivemedications such as betablockers, aspirin, and cholesterollowering drugs, yetthese drugs are underused. recent research confirms this and supports the use ofbetablockers even in diabetic patients, a group for whom some physicians hadbeen reluctant to prescribe them (chen et al., 1999). other hsr studies havesought to address questions of the adoption or lack of adoption of clinical practiceguidelines. katz (1998) found, on analyzing the ahrq guideline for unstableangina, that there were several barriers to adoption including physicianvariability. these included incomplete specification of exceptions as well asunexpected increases in demand for care. recognition of these barriers can thenbe incorporated in the development of future guidelines to ease their adoption.effects of business practices and law on health product delivery brooks et al. (1998) used hsr techniques to demonstrate that independentpharmacies are at significant disadvantage compared to chains when negotiatingwith insurers. collective bargaining by pharmacies might mitigate thisdisadvantage but is currently prevented by antitrust law. such information wouldbe impossible for a consumer to obtain and therefore impossible to act on, yet theconsumer certainly feels the effects on the pocket book of more or lessnegotiating power.risks of harm from hsrthe risks of hsr are primarily violations of privacy and confidentiality, notphysical risks. hsr thus differs from clinical research in which patients are atrisk for physical harms because they undergo invasive medical procedures orreceive unproven new therapies. potential risks of violations of privacy orbreaches of confidentiality are by no means limited to research, but can occuranytime personally identifiable health information has been collected. potentialrisks include the following: risk of public (or private) disclosure of protected health secrets, which canlead to stigmatization or discrimination in employment or insurance, and/orintroduction29protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shame: this is the fundamental issue and, for most people, probably the mostserious. risk of disruption of, or interference in, patterns within families, which mayresult from unexpected and unauthorized communication of secrets withinthe family. risk that individuals may recognize (correctly or not) their own healthhistory or anecdotes in results and interpretations of a study or may sufferanxiety simply from knowing that personal data may be in a database,without knowing whether adequate privacy protections are in place: thissubjects the person to the perception of the first risk, even if it is not actuallypresent. risk of future contact. privacy is ﬁthe right to be left alone.ﬂ yet some hsrstudies permit the collection of followup investigations that includecontacting the individual whose data are studied. in this case, a stranger tothe person or (perhaps less alarming but still disruptive) a care provider fromlong ago can suddenly intrude upon the subject's right to be left alone. risk of loss of trust in the health care system and/or scientific research, andthus loss of willingness to participate in future studies or perhaps even toseek needed health care.6these psychosocial harms can be avoided or mitigated if the research dataare coded or encrypted in such a way that individual subjects cannot beidentified. in addition, some harms can be prevented by strong antidiscriminationlaws. however, subjects may be wronged by violations of privacy andconfidentiality, even if they suffer no tangible harm. that is, even if persons donot suffer employment difficulties or can be compensated by law if they do, thisdoes not change the fact that the subjects did not receive the respect due them aspersons. the federal regulations on research on human subjects explicitly requireirbs to consider wrongs as well as harms in assessing the benefits and risks ofresearch.breaches in the confidentiality of previously collected data can occur in avariety of ways. for example, an employee who has a legitimate need to accesspart of the database to carry out his or her job may make unauthorized use of thataccess: a clerk in charge of determining insurance eligibility, or a nurse who isnot providing direct care to the patient, may review the records of anacquaintance or a celebrity just for the sake of satisfying curiosity. the greatmajority of occasions for data transfer and access occur not through research (ormalfeasance), but in standard health care operations. the great majority ofoccasions for breach of confidentiality likewise occur in daily operations.7 someinstances of breaches of confidentiality are unintentional, for example, leaving arecord that includes a patient's name out in the view of a visitor or discussing a6for a full discussion of this problem see, for example, goldman (1998).7the recent nrc report for the record (1997) discussed the increasing complexity ofhealth information flow in detail (see especially figure 3.1) p. 73. see also goldman andhudson (1999).introduction30protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.patient by name in the hearing of other parties in an elevator or cafeteria (ubel etal., 1995).8 also, some breaches are not accidental, but are oversights. thecommittee heard of one incident in which the names of employees tested for hivwere displayed with the test results on a slide at a presentation, for example. theaim of the presentation was simply to describe a database of inhouse healthrecords. some of the employees whose records were listed in the sectiondisplayed were actually attending the meeting. in this case the breach ofconfidentiality could have been avoided through more attention or training on thepart of the research team and by the use of coded identifiers rather than directidentifiers such as names.as our health care system becomes more complex, information flow islikewise increasingly complicated and the potential occasions for either a breach,or perception of a breach, of confidentiality are correspondingly multiplied. forexample, a database marketing firm received patient prescription records fromtwo large pharmacies in the washington, d.c. metro area (lo and alpers, 2000).the firm then created mailings targeted to consumers of certain prescription drugproducts on behalf of the pharmacies (using the letterhead of the pharmacies),informing them of new products with similar indications. the project wassponsored by the manufacturers of the new products, though the manufacturersdid not have access to patient data. many of the recipients were disturbed atreceiving the letters, since the action seemed to straddle or even cross the linebetween standard prescription medication compliance letters that are often sent bypharmacies to patients and product marketing.9despite the potential for misuse, there are important and legitimate reasonsto maintain some identifiability in personal health information databases. muchof the value of retrospective databased research comes from the ability to draw8in some cases the disclosure may be intentional: a particularly famous example of theimproper disclosure of personally identifiable health information occurred with theunauthorized release of the hiv status of mr. arthur ashe (mentioned widely, e.g., inshalala, 1997). it is important in the context of this report, however, to note that thisdisclosure was not made in the course of research, and it was accomplished with paperrecords. of course, such disclosures are also not part of normal health care operations.9perceptions of breach of confidentiality can also include cases where an individual has(knowingly or unknowingly) provided information in the course of responding to aconsumer survey or calling a product hotline, either of which often results in theindividual receiving marketing materials including diseaserelated product advertisinginformation. on receiving such information, some individuals may assume that privatehealth information was shared by their health care providers, not realizing that theythemselves had provided the information for the marketing effort. a different type ofconcern, again not in research but in operations, was described in a previous iom report,health data in the information age (iom, 1994). the report noted that increasing thefringe benefits offered by employers also increases pressure on the employers to controlcosts and that information about an employee's health may be shared through the companyto tailor plans so as to reduce liability (the report referred to a case that upheld the right ofan employer to reduce benefits, in which an employer became selfinsured and established alimit on aidsrelated expenses after a current employee was diagnosed with aids [p.159]).introduction31protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.inferences from data derived from different sources. for example, health careorganizations are often interested in identifying episodes of illness in a patient,which may be manifest in records of emergency room visits, ambulance services,hospital stays, operative records, bills from independent medical providers,rehabilitation services, pharmacies and pharmacy benefit managers, and so forth.in order to recognize that the data drawn from these various sources refer to theexperiences of a single individual, it is important that researchers be able toidentify the same patient in each set of records. this identification allows joiningthese various datasets into a single (logical) database that contains all relevantdata about the patient. such identification and joining is often difficult, and is oneof the motivations for keeping identifiers. the actual identity of any individual isnot really necessary to support the linkage between databases that have beenjoined; all that is required is a unique identifier, which might (at least inprinciple) be difficult to reassociate with the actual patient.even when research data are recorded in coded or encrypted format,however, it may be possible to identify individual subjects at least with goodprobability. records are directly identifiable when individual identifiers such asnames or social security numbers are collected or retained (also called ﬁmanifestidentifiabilityﬂ). yet individuals might be identified, at least probabilistically, bylinking otherwise deidentified data so that the resulting record effectivelyidentifies a particular individual. in this latter case, the information is said to beindirectly identifiable (or ﬁidentifiable by inferenceﬂ). for example, race may notbe a direct or manifest identifier in the general population, but when combinedwith the zip code of a relatively homogeneous area, a person of contrasting racecould be identified.in one example of identification by inference, latanya sweeney showed thatthree data fields (e.g., birth date, sex, and zip code) were sufficient to create alinkage in databases, locating, with good probability, the records pertaining to asingle individual who was employed by the state. she was able to do this a matterof hours using data that had been made publicly available only after all the(known) identifiers had been removed (l. sweeney, personal communication,2000; sweeney in press; see also sweeney, 1997, for further discussion). thisexample shows, first, that supposedly deidentified data may still be personallyidentifiable when combined with other available data that either are complete ordo identify individuals. second, it shows that the ability to manipulate databasesto locate individual subjects has increased due to advances in computing. even ifthe information collected is no more invasive now than previously, it is nowfeasible for others to glean personally identifiable health information from suchdata where it would have been much more difficult before.sweeney's demonstration should be a reminder that with the increasingtechnical ease of identification by inference, there can be no guarantee of absoluteconfidentiality of records. this fact in turn raises the question of how much effortand expense ought reasonably to be invested in privacy protection. there arevarious approaches to minimizing breaches of confidentiality. some call forstrong measures at the point of disclosure, such as increasing the types ofdisclosuresintroduction32protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.where explicit informed consent would be required (norsigian and billings,1998; woodward, 1999); others emphasize strong sanctions against violations ofconfidentiality by the data holders or users who release or receive secondarydata; and finally, still others argue that the best course would be to stop worryingabout it entirely and instead turn to developing ways to live in society withoutinformational barriers (as suggested by the nowwellknown aphorism of sunmicrosystem's corporate executive officer scott mcnealy, ﬁthere is no privacy,get over itﬂ).there are several important points to keep in mind about the risk of breachesin confidentiality: the risk is neither new nor research specific, and some level ofrisk is inevitable. first, the improper identification and disclosure of healthinformation about individuals is not a unique risk from hsr, nor is it a newresult of the widespread adoption of computerbased patient records,governmental or health care industry databases or the internet. most instancesoccur outside of research, in operations. also, breaches occurred with paperrecords as well. it is the case, however, that with the development of computingand communications technology, both intentional and unintentional identificationand disclosure of electronic personally identifiable health information potentiallyinvolve more types of information and more individuals than were possible withpaper records. at the most basic level, confidentiality always depends onconscious efforts by human agents to treat other human beings with respect andrestraint, whether the activity is research or not, and whatever the state of thetechnology.the protection of confidentiality is impossible to guaranteešsome level ofrisk is inevitable.10 it is possible to make breaches less likely and to increase theprobability that confidentiality will be maintained, but the protection ofconfidentiality is a matter of shifting the probabilities; it cannot be an absolute(see also ghpp, 1999, pp. 15œ16). the question really is what measures can betaken to enhance confidentiality protection, and thus retain public trust in hsr,and10the probabilistic nature of confidentiality has been recognized elsewhere, for instancea 1998 working group convened by the national cancer institute of the national instituteof health to examine the creation of informed consent documents had the followingrecommendation regarding informing potential subjects about confidentiality and itslimitations: confidentiality: the confidentiality section of the informed consent documentshould state that although measures will be taken to protect the privacy and security ofpersonallyidentifiable data, absolute confidentiality cannot be guaranteed. the consentdocument should list the organizations that will have access to personallyidentifiable dataand that personally identifiable information may be disclosed as required by law. whenlisting organizations that will have access to research records, describe for what purposesthe information will be disclosed to these organizations. (from recommendations for thedevelopment of informed consent documents for cancer clinical trials, by thecomprehensive working group on informed consent in cancer clinical trials for thenational cancer institute, october 1998, posted at the following address, http://cancertrials.nci.nih.gov/researchers/safeguards/consent/recs.html #confidentiality).introduction33protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.still allow research to proceed. since it is not possible to guarantee theconfidentiality of records in general, it is also not possible to guarantee absoluteconfidentiality in hsr. the measures we can take to increase the protection ofprivacy and confidentiality are varied, some simple and some complex, and therange of measures will change as computational and communicationstechnologies develop. the committee argues that with appropriate safeguards forconfidentiality, it is acceptable to consider a great deal of hsr as minimal riskand appropriate to carry out without requesting consent for each reanalysis ofdata.background and policy contextin recent years, public concern about privacy and maintaining theconfidentiality of personally identifiable health information has increased.legislators have responded to worried constituents by introducing a variety ofprivacy bills over several sessions of congress. currently, there is nocomprehensive federal law that protects privacy for all healthrelatedinformation. there are some federal, and varying state, statutes that protectcertain types of personally identifiable health information under certaincircumstances (see, e.g., gostin, et al, 1996; o'brian and yasnoff; 1999, alsopritts et al., 1999). one state action that has generated considerable interest of latewas the minnesota access to health records law (mccarthy et al., 1999), whichrequired informed consent from patients to use of their medical records forresearch. there has been disagreement as to the actual intent and effect of this law(melton, 1997; norsigian and billings, 1998). whatever the law's actual impact,it expresses public concerns about privacy in research. the committee felt thatthese concerns were important to address through effective privacy andconfidentiality protections and also believed that good protection could beimplemented so as to be compatible with future research. the committee hopesthat this report will help address these concerns (see box 13 for moredefinitions).in 1996, congress enacted the health insurance portability andaccountability act (hipaa), directing the secretary of health and humanservices to create detailed recommendations on standards with respect to theprivacy of personally identifiable health information. the secretary'srecommendations were delivered to congress in september 1997 (shalala,1997), and several privacy bills have been introduced in congress since. both thesecretary's recommendations and most of the privacy bills introduced in the 105thcongress would permit research using personally identifiable health informationwithout the subject's explicit permission if the research project were approved byan institutional review board.the hipaa further directed the secretary of health and human services tocreate regulations by february 2000, unless the congress had taken legislativeaction at least six months earlier. congress did not take further action, so theintroduction34protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˚;˚66˚9 #˚1"˘ˆˆ˙˚"!bˆ77˝˚˚˚˚˚introduction35protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˚˚˚the dhhs proposal would create new requirements for privacy protectionfor all health care providers and health plans, and would establish researchstandards and oversight for all research. the proposed regulations suggest that thereview function be performed by boards that are equipped to deal with dataprivacy and by organizational privacy officers who will ensure systemwidecompliance with new privacy rules. the proposed regulations contemplate thatirbs might conduct privacy review in some circumstances, but the dhhsproposal does not suggest that irbs are the only or even the best mechanism forprivacy review with respect to data studies. the proposed rule would permit theuse and disclosure of personally identifiable health information for researchwithout authorization by the subject, as long as the research protocol had beenapproved by an irb established in accord with the common rule (or fdaregulations) or by a privacy board. the proposed rule then specifies that a privacyboard would have to have members with varying backgrounds but appropriateprofessional competence, at least one member not affiliated with the organizationdoing the research, and no members with conflicts of interest (dhhs, 1999, p.60058).11 as this report was being written, dhhs was analyzing and respondingto the approximately 52,000 comments that the proposed rule elicited. recentstudies of irbs are another important policy context for this report: several havequestioned whether irbs adequately fulfill their role of protecting researchsubjects and whether they have sufficient resources to do so.11the preamble to the proposed rule further specifies a privacy board as a bodyequivalent to an irb. during the comment period, various parties disagreedabout whether the privacy board as specified would actually be equivalent to anirb and able to provide the degree of oversight necessary.introduction36protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.historically, the focus of irbs has been on protecting human subjects frompotential harm associated with participation in clinical research that involvesinvasive medical procedures or new drugs. little is known about irb practices inthe area of hsr projects, though dhhs regulations at 45 cfr 46 have alwaysapplied to nonclinical, as well as to clinical, research. furthermore, much hsrusing large databases is undertaken with private funding and, consequently, fallsoutside the purview of irbs.project and scopethis report is the product of a project sponsored by two agencies within thedhhs, the agency for healthcare research and quality (ahrq) and the officeof the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation (aspe).this report is intended for all types of professionals and organizations thatuse or disclose data on health services. for organizations that have irbs whoseresearch is subject to federal regulation, the recommendations highlight practicesalready in place in some irbs and suggest additional support for irb activities.for organizations that use or disclose data but do not have an irb or whose workis not subject to federal regulation, the practices and recommendations emphasizethat the protection of human subjects from risks, including nonphysical risks fromuse of data, is of concern to anyone who uses or discloses data. that the protectionof of human subjects from risks, including nonphysical risks form use of data, isof concern to to anyone who uses or discloses data.although not all organizations have irbs, all human subjects should betreated with the same high standards. the committee urges organizations that donot have irbs to adopt practices of reviewing proposed investigations to ensurethat data confidentiality will be maintained. the committee likewise urgesorganizations that have, as well as those that do not have, irbs to adopt systemwide confidentiality procedures and policies to protect nonresearch and researchdata.the purpose of this project was to provide information and advice to thesponsors on the current and best practices of irbs in protecting privacy in hsr.the charge to the committee was given in three parts as shown below.1. to gather information on the current practices and principles followed byirbs to safeguard the confidentiality of personally identifiable healthinformation used for health services research purposes, in particular, toidentify those irb practices that are superior in protecting the privacy,confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable health information.2. to gather information on the current practices and principles employed inprivately funded health services research studies (that are generally notsubject to irb approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information, and to consider whether and how irbbest practices in this regard might be applied to such privately sponsoredstudies.introduction37protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 12 scope of the institute of medicine study.3. if appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding theconfidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might bevoluntarily applied to health services research projects by irbs andprivate sponsors.in order to address these tasks, the iom assembled a 12member committeewith expertise in medical ethics, health services research, irb function, statistics,computer science, law, and database management. the committee met bytelephone conference in january 2000. the committee and the iom thenconvened a public workshop in march 2000. the committee invited testimonyfrom irb chairs and administrators, health services researchers, and otherofficers of academia, government and private industry (see appendix b). theworkshop also featured presentations of the drafts of two commissioned papers,one addressing special considerations of health services research andconfidentiality when the data pertain to minors (see appendix c) and the otherpresenting an international comparison of health information privacy standards(see appendix d). in addition to the workshop, the committee posted aninvitation on a list serve and on the national academies' website to irbs tocontribute information (see appendix a). the committee collected furtherinformation informally by email and telephone. the committee deliberated bytelephone and email, and in a closed meeting in april 2000, about the practicesdescribed to it. finally the committee has summarized the practices it heard thatseemed to be most effective in this report.the committee addressed privacy and confidentiality pertaining to data usedin health services research that had already been collected for another purpose.there are many other aspects of the privacy of electronic medical records thatwere beyond the charge to the committee (figure 12). the committee focusedintroduction38protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.its work on secondary analyses of data that had already been collected for otheruses, because such studies pose the most difficult ethical issues regarding hsr.although hsr that utilizes surveys and interviews (including the qualitativehsr mentioned in box 12) also raises ethical issues, the contact betweenresearchers and subjects allows the subjects to learn about the research anddecline to participate if they so choose. the committee recognized the strongconnections between these related matters and the question of protecting dataprivacy in health services research that uses existing data. the committeetherefore asks the reader to bear in mind that such related matters were not in itscharge, were not addressed by the committee, and in particular, were notdiscussed at the workshop.outline of reportchapter 2 summarizes the federal regulations as they apply to hsr studies.chapter 3 presents the committee's recommendations and findings based on theavailable information from irb's working under federal regulations. chapter 4presents the committee's recommendations and findings based on availableinformation from health care services and products companies that may not haveirbs or be subject to federal regulations. the committee holds the convictionthat studies involving human subjects should be reviewed similarly whether thestudy is subject to common rule provisions or not. as a result, the committeemakes similar recommendations regarding research that falls under the commonrule and research that does not. the committee considered combining chapter 3and chapter 4, but decided to keep them separate both because the implications ofthe recommendations might be different for different types or organizations, andbecause the separate structure seemed to reflect the committee's charge moreclearly. finally, chapter 5 returns to the topic of the limited scope of this projectin discussing research and steps for the future. as was mentioned in theworkshop, the end of this study must not be the end of studying these importantquestions, and the final chapter suggests some directions for further work.the committee gathered information through a public workshop(summarized in appendix b), a general information request posted through theinternet (see appendix a), and various unstructured interviews in the course ofstudy operations. although the committee received just a few responses to theposted call for information, those received were very informative. the committeenoted that all the providers of information, including respondents to the call forinformation, those who briefed the staff by telephone, and participants in theworkshop, are a selfselected group of professionals committed to the irbprocess. information collection was thus not systematic and random, butparticularly targeted. the committee also commissioned two background papers,one to examine hsr and minors and the other to compare privacy andconfidentiality standards across national borders, which appear as appendix cand appendix d. finally, biographical sketches of the committee members areincluded as appendix e.introduction39protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2human subjects protection and healthservices research in federal regulationsthis chapter presents a brief summary of the federal regulations governingthe protection of human subjects in research, with particular attention to how theconcepts of the regulations fit with the methodology of health services research(hsr). it provides background for the chapters on the practices of organizationsinvolved in human subjects research, since one of the primary goals of thisproject is to help understand how institutional review boards (irbs) implementthese regulations for hsr.irbs and human subjects protectionthe cornerstones of u.s. regulations on the protection of human subjects arereview by institutional review boards and informed consent from participants inresearch.background of federal regulationsthe belmont report (belmont, 1979) articulated three principles forresearch on human subjects: respect for persons, beneficence, and justice.ﬁrespect for persons,ﬂ in the analysis of the report, includes the notions that eachhuman individual should be treated as an autonomous agent and that those whosecapacities preclude autonomy either temporarily or throughout life are owedspecial protection. the main practical expression of the principle of respect forpersons is the requirement that the researcher first obtain the informed consent ofthe subject(s). ﬁbeneficence,ﬂ or doing good, requires that the risks ofhuman subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations40protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research be reasonable in relation to the possible benefits and that any riskssubjects may incur be minimized.1 ﬁjusticeﬂ requires that benefits and harms ofresearch be shared fairly. applying the justice principle, the irb should ensurethat the selection of subjects or potential subject populations is equitable. ofcourse it is one thing to enunciate general principles and quite another to ensuretheir consistent and correct application in particular cases. there are manydifficult borderline issues in the ethics of human subjects research. difficulties inapplying the principles underlying regulations on the protection of humansubjects in hsr differ from those in clinical research (iezzoni, 1999 and lo,1999). these difficulties stem, in large part, from the history of the documentsarticulating human subjects protection and the nature and methodology of hsrfederal regulations assume that clinical research is the paradigmatic use of humansubjects and therefore are directed primarily toward avoiding physical harm to theindividual subject. hsr studies, however, are generally more removed from thehuman subjects, because they employ methodologies for sorting, linking, andotherwise manipulating previously collected data. this aspect of hsr raises avariety of questions about application of the ethical principles underlying ourbeliefs about the proper treatment of human subjects. the question of whether aparticular project is research can have substantial ramifications in the ethical,scientific, legal, and procedural requirements attached to it (lo, 1999).irb reviewin the united states, federally supported and regulated human subjectsresearch is covered by regulations adopted specifically by 16 federal agenciesthat conduct, support, or regulate research with human subjects. this shared bodyof regulation, which is the ﬁcommon rule,ﬂ appears at 45 cfr 46 subpart a forthe department of health and human services. the food and drugadministration has adopted similar regulations at 21 cfr 50 and 56.irb review ensures that the proposed research protocol will be reviewed bypeople who are knowledgeable and not directly involved in the research. theirb's membership and function are defined in the regulations to ensure that it hassufficient expertise and diversity to provide appropriate review. diversity1it is important to realize that this requirement is not redundant. the first part considersthe relative benefits and risks of a protocol, and acknowledges that increased scientificunderstanding is desirable but is completely without cost. at the same time, the secondpart mandates that an overall benefitœrisk calculation ought not be made withoutsimultaneously considering the cost to the individual. that is, making the benefitœriskcalculation in part 1 of the requirement treats the subject as a means to realizing a benefit.the part 2 provides a check on part 1, ensuring that the subject is not treated as a meansonly. the lack of the part 2 check is why there has been controversy about using theresults of certain nazi experiments, notably the series on hypothermia: the data may besound, but even if the information gained would benefit society, the cost to the subjectswas unacceptable, so many regard the data as tainted beyond redemption (ivy, 1947, inreiser et al., 1977).human subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations41protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.should include gender, race, culture, and profession. in addition to scientists, theirb must include at least one person who is not otherwise connected with theinstitution and at least one nonscientist.many factors must be considered in evaluating the risks and benefits of aresearch project, including its scientific merit and policy relevance, its relevanceto the local community, community values and standards of care, the specificresearch setting, the populations targeted for recruitment, the nature of theresearch questions and measures, and the cultural diversity of the targetpopulations. for these reasons, a good irb needs to have experts both with localand with national knowledge.what research is subject to federal regulations?federal regulations apply to all research involving human subjects that issupported by federal funds, with certain exceptions. in addition, the fda has apolicy of not reviewing any research submitted with a new product applicationunless that research was conducted according to the regulations, regardless offunding (21 cfr 56.103(a) and (b); see also, for example regarding contents ofapplications to investigate or market new drugs, 21 cfr 312.66 and 314.50(d)(3)(i)).many organizations that conduct a great deal of federally funded orregulated research involving human subjects have multiple project assurances(mpas) through the office of human research protections (ohrp, formerlyoffice for protection from research risks or oprr) in which they have agreedto comply with federal regulations for any human subjects research, even thoseprojects that are funded by some nonfederal source and would not otherwise tocovered by the regulations. an ﬁassuranceﬂ is an agreement or contract betweenan institution and the ohrp, on behalf of the secretary of health and humanservices. the assurance stipulates the methods by which the institution willprotect the rights and welfare of research subjects in accordance with theregulations. an mpa can be approved for up to fiveyear intervals.2what establishes a project as research?the definition of research in the regulations specifies ﬁa systematicinvestigation . . . designed to develop or contribute to generalizableknowledgeﬂ (45 cfr 46.102(d)). as discussed in the committee's workshop (seeappendix b), the2mpa is defined in the oprr guidebook chapter 2, section a(iii). there are severalthousand irbs in operation, though estimates of the exact number vary between 3,000 and5,000 (oig, 2000, p. 20). approximately 750 of these irbs are located in approximately430 organizations (some have several irbs) that have entered into mpas with the ohrp.the great majority (more than 98 percent) of these mpas cover all human subjectsresearch in the organization, although a few organizations have limited their mpas tocover only federally funded studies (gary ellis, formerly of oprr, and jon merz,university of pennsylvania, personal communications).human subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations42protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.interpretation of the key phrase ﬁgeneralizable knowledgeﬂ is difficult and can becontroversial.3 some irbs interpret this phrase to cover only projects in whichthe investigator intends to publish the results, whereas others interpret the phraseas covering projects whose results are disseminated beyond the department orunit conducting the study, for example, dissemination through oral presentationsat scientific or other professional meetings. the difficulty is especially acute indefining the boundaries of hsr since, as discussed in the previous chapter, manyprojects could reasonably be categorized either as research ﬁdesigned tocontribute to generalizable knowledgeﬂ or as ﬁas internal quality assurance.ﬂwhat establishes a research study as involving human subjects?the regulations define a human subject as ﬁa living individual about whoman investigator conducting research obtains data through intervention orinteraction with the individual, or identifiable private information (45 cfr46.102(f)). the former is not applicable in studies analyzing previously collecteddata. private information, in this context, is defined as ﬁinformation aboutbehavior that occurs in a context in which an individual can reasonably expectthat no observation or recording is taking place, and information which has beenprovided for specific purposes by an individual and which the individual canreasonably expect will not be made public (e.g., a medical record) (45 cfr46.102(f)). the definition stipulates that the information must be individuallyidentifiable, that is, the identity of the individual can readily be ascertained orassociated with the information. in short, the open question for a project in hsris whether the information is identifiable.what hsr may be exempt from irb review?the regulations allow an irb to exempt from further review research onexisting data and records, that is, for data and records that have been collectedpreviously and could be reanalyzed (see box 21 for definitions, see also 45cfr46.101(b)(4)):(4) research involving the collection or study of existing data, documents,records, pathological specimens, or diagnostic specimens, if these sourcesare publicly available or if the information is recorded by the investigatorin such a manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or throughidentifiers linked to the subjects.3some authors have turned more attention to the phrase ﬁdesigned toﬂ and concentratedon the initial intention of the investigators (see amdur, in press). in hsr, however thiscriterion, while helpful, may still be ambiguous, since intentions may change as theproject develops. as noted, projects that start as qa or qi may turn out to be publishableand then require irb approval.human subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations43protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9 #!˚%˝""#$˚0/9 #˚˚9 #˚˚"#$˚˚'(9 #"#$ˆ˙#˝'(9 #"#$˚human subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations44protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved."#$/"#$"#$"#$of course there are difficulties here too, in addition to those alreadydiscussed, such as the meaning of ﬁrecorded by the investigator.ﬂ someinterpretations apply this exemption as long as no identifiers will be made public;others, if the investigator will not have the identifiers (although an assistantmight); and others, only if no identifiers will be recorded by anyone. the ohrphas clarified that information should be considered identifiable regardless of whoholds the code that can link information to individuals, and the holder may be theresearcher, the data provider organization, or some third party. a particularproblem in hsr that the regulations do not directly address is the possibility ofidentifying in databases individuals who have an unusual constellation ofcharacteristics. such indirect inferences can be made by using computer analysesand linking several databases. in addition, when the study participants are knownto the investigators in other contexts, such as clinical care or community ties, theidentity of individuals with rare characteristics can be inferred.as the committee heard in the workshop, some institutions have an explicitpolicy requiring that all protocols be screened by the irb, so that investigatorsare never placed in the position of deciding themselves whether their projectsshould be exempt from irb review. the irb or irb office can ensure that theprotocol meets the criteria for exemption from irb review. under thisinterpretation, the term ﬁexemptﬂ does not mean ﬁexempt from any irboversight.ﬂ although the irb may determine the protocol to be exempt fromcertain requirements, it may require others, such as periodic status reports. often,the irb chair and members who do the initial screening of potentially exemptprotocols also carry out expedited review.some committee members suggested that the very term ﬁexempt,ﬂ althoughformally codified in the regulations, may be misleading. in particular, theregulations might mislead investigators to exempt their own research, when infact the protocol may not meet regulatory criteria for exemption. in addition,some committee members remarked that the regulatory term expedited may beunfortunate, since surely both investigators and irb members would wish all irbreviews to be completed promptly. finally, one possible solution might be todiscard bothhuman subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations45protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.terms in favor of ﬁadministrative reviewﬂ since so many of these studies doreceive quick turnaround review from the irb chair and/or administrator.what hsr may qualify for expedited review?the regulations also provide for expedited review of protocols in certaincases. an expedited review is carried out by the irb chair or by one or moreexperienced irb members. the dhhs publishes a list of categories of researchthat may be eligible for expedited review, including records research, whichfollows (63 fr 60364œ60367, november 9, 1998):ﬁ(5) research involving materials (data, documents, records, or specimens) thathave been collected, or will be collected solely for nonresearch purposes (suchas medical treatment or diagnosis).ﬂto qualify for expedited review, research must involve no more thanminimal risk. the concept of ﬁminimal riskﬂ therefore plays a prominent role indetermining whether a study qualifies for expedited review. studies may not,however, qualify for expedited review if (63 fr 60364œ60367, november 9,1998)ﬁ[i]dentification of the subjects and/or their responses would reasonably placethem at risk of criminal or civil liability or be damaging to the subjects' financialstanding, employability, insurability, reputations, or be stigmatizing, unlessreasonable and appropriate protections will be implemented so that risks relatedto invasions of privacy and breach of confidentiality are not greater thanminimal.ﬂif the reviewers do not approve the study for expedited review, it mustreceive a full irb review.may informed consent be waived?for a project that is research involving human subjects and is not exempt,the irb must ensure that the subjects have given free and informed consent toparticipate unless the informed consent requirement may be waived. in general,the irb must ensure that the subjects receive adequate information about theresearch protocol, and its possible benefits and risks, in a form that isunderstandable to them; and that their consent was not coerced (45 cfr 46116(a)); and finally, that their consent was documented (45 cfr 46.117).the requirement of informed consent may, however, be waived by the irbif the research involves no more than minimal risk, the waiver will not harm therights or welfare of the subjects, the research could not otherwise be practicablycarried out, and when appropriate, the subjects will be provided with additionalinformation after participating (45 cfr 46 116(d)). the concept of ﬁminimalriskﬂ is therefore a key element in determining whether informed consent can bewaived.human subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations46protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what is minimal risk?minimal risk, as defined in the regulations, ﬁmeans that the probability andmagnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater in andof themselves that those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during theperformance of routine physical or psychological examinations or testsﬂ (45 cfr46 102(i)). like the terms discussed above, ﬁminimal riskﬂ can raise difficulties.for instance, it is not clear whether the terms ﬁdaily lifeﬂ and ﬁroutine testsﬂ referto healthy people or to sick patients. in a clinical trial, the risk of side effects maybe much greater in sick patients than in healthy volunteers. other difficulties ariseparticularly in the case of hsr. on the one hand, in hsr projects that involveonly analyses of previously collected data, there is no risk of physical harms suchas an adverse reaction to an investigational drug or device. on the other hand, if asubject believes it reasonable to expect that medical records will not be disclosedfor other purposes and the subject is later identified, he or she may well considerthe risk to have been greater than ordinarily encountered and may feel wrongedby a waiver of informed consent.previous studies of irbsseveral recent studies have examined irb function and procedures. thedhhs' national institutes of health (nih) commissioned a largescale study ofirbs that was released in may 1998 (bell et al., 1998). this study concluded thatthe irb system was functioning according to the regulations and was providingan adequate level of protection for human subjects although improvements werecertainly possible. many respondents to this study expressed concern about thelarge and rapidly expanding workload of irbs. the following month, the dhhsoffice of the inspector general (oig) released a study that highlighted severalchallenges to the irb system (brown (oig), 1998b). this report noted that irbsare facing greatly expanded workloads including new types of research.furthermore, irbs do not always have access to either the expert personnel or thetraining they would need in order to deal effectively with some of this research.the need for improved irb training and access to expert consultants also arose inthe present iom study.in february 1999, the u.s. general accounting office (gao) released areport on irb function in the specific context of medical records privacy (gao,1999). the gao study observed that irb review currently may not ensure theconfidentiality of medical records when used in research. if the research is to beconducted at another institution, the irb may rely on the confidentiality policiesand procedures in place at that institution rather than carrying out its ownassessment of the confidentiality of the data. furthermore, the irb may nevereven consider the issue of confidentiality if the study itself is eligible forexemption or expedited review according to the provisions of the federalregulations. several of the respondents to the gao study, however, detailed theinformation they require of investigators. these requirements, includinghuman subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations47protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statements of who will have access to the data and what provisions will protectthe confidentiality of the data, were similar to some practices that were presentedto the committee, which are highlighted in chapter 3.in april 2000, the oig released an update reporting on conditions since its1998 recommendations. according to the oig, the problem of resourcescontinues to plague irbs. the oig summarized its previous recommendation onresources and its current assessment:ﬁprior recommendations: require that irbs have sufficient resources toadequately carry out their duties. our recommendation was directed not only tostaff and board member resources, but also to space, computers, and otheressential elements. we urged oprr (note: now ohrp) to hold institutionsaccountable for the resource commitments they made in their assurances.update: oprr's enforcement efforts have brought attention to irb resourceshortages at individual institutions and have led to additional support for irbfunction at a number of those institutionsšand quite likely at others that havetaken note of the oprr efforts. however, no further action has been taken todevelop indicators of adequate resource levels or enable greater investments tosupport irb functions. one approach that warrants more attention, and that nihreports is under consideration, would be to allow an additional increment ofgrant funds to institutions to be used to provide necessary resources for irbs.such an approach could help reinforce to institutions and investigators that awellsupported irb is a necessary cost of doing business. (brown (oig), 2000,p. 15).ﬂthe irb is the central feature of our human subjects protection system, so itis not surprising that the functioning of irbs continues to generate great interestboth in the federal government and in the nation generally. subsequent chaptersof this report suggest approaches that some irbs have used with good success,but implementing them requires resources.human subjects protection in hsrwithin hsr, application of the three principles of human subjects protection(respect for persons, beneficence, and justice) to the subjects of data in large databases becomes quite problematic, especially for researchers who may have nomeans of knowing the identity of the individuals. the general question of seekinginformed consent poses a number of challenges, for example: in cases where large, rich databases already exist, a requirement to contactsubjects prior to reanalyzing the data effectively would make it impossible touse the data for research (iezzoni, 1999). all of the data would then bewasted, and no good research, hence none of the benefits of research, wouldbe available. further, the act of contacting the people requires more information andinvades their lives, so if the information used in and resulting from theresearch did remain truly anonymous, the investigator would have violatedthe privacy of thehuman subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations48protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.subjects anyway simply to tell them about an activity that might not beviolating their privacy. also, contacting individuals requires personalidentifiers, so someone would have to know who was in the study, therebyraising the disclosure risk. whatever the independent good of seeking informed consent in general, arequirement to seek it for hsr also could result in biased samples. thepotential bias that would have to be considered could come about asdescribed below. asking individually for consent to use data in a study lowers the participationrate. asking people for permission to use their medical information incomplex statistical models of health care systems may lead to increasedconfusion and unnecessary fear and anxiety. hsr can be difficult to explainto a nontechnical audience, and attempting to show why each variable isneeded may give the audience the impression of being manipulated. because nonparticipants may differ from participants in significant ways,asking individually for consent will introduce bias that may not be possible tocontrol. as a result of bias from nonparticipation, the quality of the evidence resultingfrom the final analysis will be reduced. as a result of bias from nonparticipation, the balance of benefit and riskin the study will be less favorable.hsr investigators and their irbs have concluded that individual informedconsent, especially on a studybystudy basis, is one of the aspects of the clinicalresearch model that is impossible to apply in research conducted by analyzingpreviously collected data. at the same time, the law presumably passed because asizable number of citizens were concerned, which would be consistent with theresults of a 1993 harris health information privacy survey showing that 64percent of respondents said their permission should be required before theirrecords could be used in medical research, even if no personally identifiedinformation about them were published. in clinical research, specific informedconsent is, as has been pointed out, the bedrock realization of the principle ofrespecting persons. in hsr, where the risks and the constraints are different, it isnecessary to identify or develop alternative modes of respecting persons that willapply the principle in a feasible manner and address concerns about maintainingthe confidentiality of the data.principles and practicesthe application of the basic principles of human subjects protection in hsrraises specifically questions such as: privacy ought to be protected, confidentiality ought to be maintained, and persons whose data are recorded ought to be respected.human subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations49protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many responsible professional groups and expert individuals have developedsets of guiding principles for the treatment of health information.4the objective of this study was to collect practices. good practices shouldapply the principles of ethical human subjects research but also provide morespecific guidance to investigators and irbs than abstract principles can provide.in addition, good practices are flexible, taking into account the type of researchand type of organization in question. that is to say, if we agree that we want tosupport hsr and obtain the benefits it has to offer, then we must identify andimplement practices that adequately protect the subjects of hsr, while allowingworthwhile hsr to proceed. the committee hopes that the practices highlightedin the following chapters will facilitate hsr with appropriate and feasiblemechanisms for the protection of human subjects, and will stimulate thedevelopment and dissemination of more advanced practices in the future.the scope of this study, highlighting the empirical collection of practices,recognized that good normative principles are already codified in the federalregulations, but that no amount of codification can provide adequate direction forthe daybyday, studybystudy, work of an irb. in short, regulations areimportant to provide norms, but they must still be implemented with thejudgment and practical experience of individuals closest to the situation. this iswhat the local irb system is designed to do. as apparent in chapter 3 andchapter 4, the sense of the committee is that the local irb system is strong andthe committee strongly supports hsr using it.any local irb that reviews hsr will, however, have to understand thespecial problems of hsr and how to apply the federal regulations. the aim ofsharing best practices is to support the local irb with the good ideas alreadydeveloped by other irbs. one real challenge will be to find the best means ofdisseminating these good ideas (chapter 5).4because different groups are developing principles to address different problems, or atleast to address problems in different contexts, the sets of principles do not directly overlapin many instancesšin particular, not mentioning a principle is not evidence that anorganization would oppose it. these different perspectives make for difficult comparison(but see buckovich et al., 1999). for example, several recommend removing personalidentifiers as early, as and to the greatest extent, possible (ghpp, ispe, lowrance) or withsome reservations (aamc), many urge the proactive development of procedural andtechnical safeguards to protect privacy (ghpp, ispe, jhita, aamc, lowrance) and callfor imposing penalties for breaches of confidentiality (ghpp, aamc, jhita, ispe,phrma, lowrance); some include specific protection for data access for research(aamc, phrma); and several support the idea that individuals should be able to reviewtheir own records (ghpp, jhita, ispe, lowrance).human subjects protection and health services research in federalregulations50protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3best practices for irb review of healthservices research subject to federalregulationsresearch with human beings is subject to federal regulations if it is federallysupported or regulated for some other reason (e.g., will be submitted to the fdaas part of a new drug application). in addition, organizations that hold a multipleproject assurance (mpa) from the office of human research protections(ohrp, formerly oprr) usually, as a condition of the mpa, require all researchat the institution to be subject to federal regulations, including research that is notfederally supported. furthermore, some organizations that do not hold such anmpa may also require all research to be conducted in accordance with federalregulations as a matter of organizational policy.this chapter presents the recommendations and findings of the committeeregarding the practices of institutional review board (irb) review for healthservices research (hsr) that is done according to the federal regulations (whetherthe organization follows the federal regulations by requirement or by policychoice). the committee collected information from some universities and healthcenters and private research foundations, hearing testimony at a public workshopand collecting materials and statements from participating irbs (see appendix aand appendix b).the committee was not able to conduct a comprehensive survey of irbpractices. the recommendations and findings that follow are based on theavailable data from a limited number of organizations and may not berepresentative of the entire irb system. the committee presents theserecommendations and findings in the hope that they may be helpful to someorganizations, and may inform and stimulate further discussion about how irbscan better fulfill their important role.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations51protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendationsrecommendation 31. organizations should work with their irbs todevelop specific guidance and examples on how to interpret key terms in thefederal regulations pertinent to the use in hsr of data previously collectedfor other purposes. such terms include generalizable knowledge, identifiableinformation, minimal risk and privacy and confidentiality. organizations andtheir irbs should then make such guidance and examples available toinvestigators submitting proposals for review.the committee found that several topics cause considerable worry toinvestigators and irbs because federal regulations are open to varyinginterpretations, with divergent implications.the first of these topics is what activities are considered research and whatcriteria are used to operationalize the distinction between research and otheractivities. a key feature of the federal definition of research is whether theactivity contributes to generalizable knowledge. in trying to distinguish researchfrom activities such as quality assessment (qa) or quality improvement (qi) thatuse similar techniques to analyze personal health information in databases,however, both the federal regulations and the interpretations of these regulationsby ohrp contain insufficient practical guidance for investigators and irbs.a second important issue is what constitutes identifiable information asdefined in the federal regulations. once again, the federal regulations providelittle direction to investigators and irbs on how to operationalize these terms, forexample, whether or how it would be determined that data were unidentifiable, ifthey were coded in such as way that the investigator would have access to thedata but also have great difficulty in reestablishing the identity of subjects.a third issue is what constitutes minimal risk in hsr research and, inparticular, what steps to protect the confidentiality of data in hsr suffice to allowthe project to be considered as minimal risk. the issues of identifiableinformation and minimal risk have important implications for whether a projectmay be exempt from irb review or receive expedited review or whetherinformed consent of research participants may be waived.on all these issues, irbs should communicate more directly withinvestigators and give local examples more specific than the guidance currentlyavailable in federal regulations and clarifications by ohrp. clearer guidancewould make irb review more efficient as well as enhance the protection ofsubjects by helping to ensure that hsr projects incorporate confidentialityprotections that the irb finds important.the committee found that irbs vary in how they interpret federal guidelinespertaining to whether a project is intended to yield ﬁgeneralizable knowledge ﬂand thus should be subject to irb review.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations52protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the federal definition, research is ﬁdesigned to develop or contribute togeneralizable knowledgeﬂ (45 cfr 46.102(d)). the concept of generalizableknowledge seems to include both scientific rigoršto avoid error and to assurethat findings can be widely appliedšand an intent to disseminate the findings ofthe investigation. the irb representatives participating in the workshop agreedthat an activity would be considered research if the investigator plans to publishthe findings. irbs differ, however, in how they interpret other situations,particularly activities that might be considered qa or qi. some organizationstake an inclusive view of research, considering a project to be research if thefindings will be disseminated outside the division or department that carried outthe project. in this view, if the findings will be presented at a scientific meetingor to administrators from other organizations (e.g. other teaching hospitals), theywill contribute to generalizable knowledge even if they are not published. dr.james kahn of the university of california in san francisco, for instance,suggested at the workshop that if data are collected systematically, the projectshould be reviewed by the irb, since it is reasonably likely that the investigatorwill publish the results if the findings are interesting (see appendix b).ms. angela khan, irb administrator from the university of texas healthsciences center in san antonio (uthscsa) explained at the workshop (seeappendix b) that her institution's irb considers a number of issues in decidingwhether a project is research rather than qa or qi. in assessing whether certainstudies (generally only those directed toward internal qa) should be exempt fromreview, the irb would consider whether the findings of the study will be disseminated beyond the departmentproposing to carry out the study; the protocol includes any change in clinical care or clinical processes thatwill affect other patients; the data to be collected would be available to the investigator only throughthe study (i.e., the investigator would not have access to such data in normalpractice); and, is any risk of harm or wrong to patients or staff.if the answer to all of these questions is ﬁno,ﬂ then the uthscsa irbwould consider the protocol exempt as a qa activity. other research may beexempt under the regulations but probably also would be reviewed at least by asubcommittee of the irb, and informed consent might still be required. ms. khanalso noted that generally the first consideration alone is sufficient to classify aproject as research, since most investigators do in fact wish to publish theirfindings, even from projects that were planned as internal investigations, if theyshould prove interesting.on the other hand, other irbs use a narrower view of research. dr. robertamdur of the university of florida and also a presenter at the workshop (seeappendix b) suggested a contrasting approach. starting from the premise thatactivities best characterized as qa or qi should be excluded from irb review,best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations53protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.he argued that publication (i.e., contributing to a lasting collection ofgeneralizable knowledge), is a necessary condition for an activity to beconsidered research. therefore if researchers say that they would not carry out theproject if the results could not be made public, the project must be consideredresearch. by contrast, for nonresearch activities such as qa or qi, there wouldstill be sufficient internal organizational motivation for collecting the data, eventhough the activity would never increase the store of generalizable knowledge(amdur et al., in press).the committee found that another common dilemma occurs when theinvestigator does not initially intend to publish, and therefore does not ask for irbreview, but afterwards discovers the findings to be so interesting that they oughtto be published. irbs apparently vary in the way they handle such situations.because the intentions of the investigators may change, other authors havesuggested additional criteria for research, similar to those that some irbs arealready using. casarett et al. (2000) suggest considering a qa or qi project asresearch if most of the subjects would not be expected to benefit directly from theknowledge generated and if the subjects would incur risks beyond those ofnormal practice.the committee also heard that the determination of whether an activity isresearch, and hence how the observed individuals are to be protected, isparticularly problematic in small organizations. small organizations wishing tostudy their outcomes to improve their operations may not have access toresources for developing formal protocols and may not have an irb that canreview the project. thus, an inclusive definition of research could precludeimportant projects in small organizations. in the workshop, participant dr. joannelynne of rand gave the example of small hospices and home health careorganizations who want to improve their own services but also share theirfindings with similar organizations, perhaps as part of a multisite study. thecommittee noted, however, that the likelihood of identifying individuals and thedifficulty of maintaining confidentiality are both greatly increased in smallorganizations. furthermore, in hospice care, information may be recorded aboutsuch sensitive topics as family disputes, emotional problems, or even illegalactivities such as physicianassisted suicide. hence individuals who are patientsin small organizations and who are the subjects of projects carried out in smallorganizations that fall in the ambiguous zone between research and qa/qi, maybe in need of the protection due human subjects; indeed they may be veryvulnerable populations in need of strong protections.the committee concluded that in light of these different viewpoints ofvarious irbs, investigators may be unclear how federal guidelines define researchand how their own irb will interpret those guidelines with regard to hsr.the committee found that some irbs have specific and detailed criteria fordetermining whether information is identifiable.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations54protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in the federal guidelines, research on existing data, documents, or records isexempt from irb review ﬁif the information is recorded by the investigator insuch a manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or through identifierslinked to the subjectsﬂ (45 cfr 46.101(b)(4)). thus, the concept of identifiableinformation is crucial in determining whether an hsr project is exempt from irbreview. as mentioned in chapter 1, the question of whether a record isidentifiable is difficult because identifiability is not a property solely of the recorditself but may be an inferential result of the record plus a linkage with some asyetunspecified database by an asyetundefined algorithm. how the question isanswered has profound implications for the way the research in question will beregulated (lo, 1999).ms. khan noted that the uthscsa irb, regarding projects using data fromcomputer databases, asks the investigator to list all the fields to be collected andto indicate who will actually collect the data, how respect for confidentiality byany personnel involved will be ensured, and how further dissemination of theinformation will be prevented (e.g., storing data on computers that are notnetworked, storing codes identifying individuals separately from data, usingpasswords and/or key requirements to restrict access both to computers for datastorage and to computer housing identifying codes). another workshoppresenter, dr. tora bikson of rand, suggested a general rule that rand uses:if sorting data according to any variables produces subsets with ten or fewermembers, these individuals will be at risk for identifiability by inference. thecommittee did not test or corroborate this cutoff point, which would require moretheoretical work, but noted that rules of this type are good examples of usefulpractices.the committee concluded that it is desirable for several reasons to have suchexplicit criteria on the identifiability of information. explicit criteria improve thequality of hsr by promoting more careful consideration of the issue of whetherinformation can be linked to identifiable individuals. furthermore, explicitcriteria promote consistency in the irb review and allow more efficient review.if investigators know how the irb determines whether information isidentifiable, they can use that knowledge in study design to avoid problems suchas building in unintentional identifiability. at the same time, it is important toremember that identifiability is a dynamic property, so it will never be possible torely on a list of steps or an algorithmšthe investigator and the irb will have tothink critically and exercise judgment in every case.the committee found that irbs vary in how they handle projects that may qualifyas exempt from irb review and in the formality of procedures for expeditedreview.the committee heard that some organizations require any investigator tonotify the irb of all projects, including projects that might qualify for one of theexemptions in the federal regulations, and to submit annual status reports. bynotifying the irb of a project, the investigator would at least have the benefit ofbest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations55protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some external review of the protocol. several organizations provide investigatorswith interactive online or at least printable forms that ﬁwalkﬂ the investigatorthrough a short deliberation about whether the protocol really qualifies forexemption from irb review (see box 31 and figure 2 in appendix b). on theother hand, other organizations allow investigators to decide for themselveswhether a protocol is exempt from irb review, and do not attempt to determinewhether the investigator's decision is consistent with federal regulations. stillother organizations may allow the department head or chair to certify that aresearch project qualifies for exemption.the sense of the committee is that any project benefits from at least somereview from a party external to the project. in many projects, a review by an irbchair or member alone may be sufficient, but even this quick review provides theproject, the investigator, and most of all, the potential subjects with the benefit ofan outside check that human subjects are adequately protected.likewise, clarifying the institutional procedures for expedited irb review inhsr would have several salutary effects. it would call the attention ofinvestigators to ethical issues regarding hsr. furthermore, such clarificationwould encourage health services researchers to consider in a standardized way theissues of irb review, patient consent, and protecting confidentiality. clearer andmore standardized procedures would make irb operations more efficient, first,by allowing irb members to focus their attention on difficult cases and, second,by giving investigators suggestions that irbs currently request only after aprotocol is reviewed, so that the investigators would be likely to submit proposalsthat incorporated these elements the first time. finally, such standardizationincreases compliance with irb policies and federal regulations that are intendedto protect subjects in hsr.recommendation 32. irbs should develop and disseminate principles,policies, and best practices for investigators regarding privacy andconfidentiality issues in hsr that makes use of personal health datapreviously collected for other uses.confidentiality in handling health information is important for its own sakeand for the enhancement of public trust in research. the committee heard severalinnovative and feasible ways to facilitate the maintenance of confidentiality.the committee found that the identifiability of data in hsr is a continuum, suchthat absolute guarantees of confidentiality are impossible.even when investigators have made reasonable and goodfaith efforts todeidentify data, to restrict access to a needtoknow basis, and to maintainconfidentiality, the identity of an individual can sometimes still be inferred. thecommittee heard of examples in which individuals could be probabilisticallyidentified from supposedly deidentified public use files. the committee alsoheard about the increased chances of identification within small populations (seeappendix b). these probabilistic identifications by inference result fromunforeseen links between the deidentified data in one database and complete oridentifiable data from another source. it is also, of course, always possible for ahuman employee mistakenly to allow data to become available.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations56protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˘ˆ˛˚ !"#$˝!˝˘((((((ˆ8?˝((˚((")!˛(many health services researchers and irbs have developed practical andspecific procedures for protecting privacy and confidentiality in hsr projectsthat involve analyses of previously compiled databases. for example, researchersin health services may need to identify individual subjects to combine data fromdifferent datasets or to compare followup information with baseline data. suchprojects can still protect subjects by using computergenerated identifiers or byencrypting the data, rather than identifying individuals by name, hospital recordnumber, or social security number. when the project requires definite linking,the researcher will have to use unique individual identifiers, such as socialsecurity number, medicare health insurance claim number, health recordnumber, or some unique code generated within the project for this purpose, toestablish that records in different datasets belong to the same person. however,relying on a single linking variable can lead to some errors if the number isentered incorrectly for a particular transaction (hospital stay, doctor's officevisit). therefore, prudent investigators would, if possible, use some otherattributebest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations57protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.as a corroborating linking variable, such as sex or date of birth. probabilisticlinking, in contrast, reflects the fact that people can share identifying attributessuch as names and birthdates, so that investigator is not certain that the linkedrecords belong to the same person.in other cases the identifying information needed for accurate data mergingmay not be specific to the patient. for instance, a study on hospital characteristicsmight require the names of hospitals to merge medicare part a claims files withthe american hospital association survey database, but would not have toidentify specific patients. in addition, researchers can take additional steps toprevent the identification of individuals with unusual characteristics (see alsotable 31 for further detail). there may be only a few individuals of a given agewith a rare diagnosis in a certain zip code who were hospitalized between certaindates, and such individuals may be readily identified by inference because thereare so few persons with these characteristics. researchers can, however, changethe recording of the data so that there are more records in each data cell. forinstance, it is harder to identify individuals if the investigator records the year ofbirth rather than the exact birthdate, the first three digits of the zip code ratherthan the entire zip code, and the number of hospitalized days rather than the exactdates of hospitalization. furthermore, researchers can reduce the number ofoutliers on a scale by collapsing categories at the extremes of the scale. forinstance, the researcher can set the highest value for a costofhospitalization datafield at something greater than a certain dollar amount, rather than retaining theexact figures for highcost hospitalizations. although there can be no absoluteguarantees of confidentiality, these measures reduce the likelihood thatindividual subjects would be identified. if adopted more widely whereappropriate, these procedures would enhance protections for subjects of hsr. atthe same time, it is important for irbs to bear in mind that different techniquesare appropriate in different research projects, so different subsets of thesetechniques might be applicable or not usable in different studies.the committee found that irbs were able to suggest many ways in whichprotocols could better protect confidentiality with simple measures.the committee heard of cases that illustrated problems or potential problemswith confidentiality that irbs had averted. in some studies, investigators plannedto record identifiers with the data even though there was no need to maintain theidentifiers. in fact when the irb questioned the necessity for using identifieddata, the investigators realized they simply had never thought of whether theirresearch required the identification and they immediately removed them. inanother instance, already mentioned, that was reported to the committee at theworkshop, one participant described finding his own hiv results projected in ameeting with personally identifying information, with no other purpose thanshowing an example of records in the database. in both cases, the basic problemappeared to be that the persons collecting data had not considered theconfidentialitybest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations58protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.implications of their methods. these examples demonstrate the usefulness of areview independent of those involved in the protocol.the committee also found that some irbs give detailed attention and clearadvice to investigators on how better to protect confidentiality at various stepsof an hsr project.ms. khan said that for any protocol involving particularly sensitive data, theuthscsa irb requires the investigator to obtain a federal certificate ofconfidentiality. the certificate of confidentiality is a legal mechanism (describedin the public health service act, section 301(d)) designed to protect certaintypes of sensitive data from subpoena (see wolf and lo, 1999). the committeealso heard, however, from organizations that store such sensitive data in facilitiesoutside the united states to protect them from discovery processes (thecommittee did not, however, seek legal opinions as to whether such a strategywould provide effective legal protection from discovery). colonel anderson, irbchair at the united states army medical research institute of infectious disease,reported that the army's procedures specify that that an investigator may requestthat research records be maintained on request under special coded identificationnumbers, with a linkage to the individual's social security number. the keylinking the study identification number and the social security number is thenstored separately under extremely limited access. in general, networked,distributed, and backedup digital information and environments together posenew types of threats to privacy. some researchers, for instance, may not realizethat taking a diskette with backup files home to work on a personal computer thatis connected to a dsl line (that is on all the time) creates a serious securitybreach. such examples suggest that the role of technical experts may yet beunderappreciated.the committee found that violations of privacy and confidentiality might occur inhsr studies that have small numbers of subjects in cells, but that careful irbreview including appropriate consultation with persons knowledgeable aboutany specific community norms may help investigators to revise protocols toreduce such risks.the committee heard that small, isolated minority communities and theirindividual members might be particularly vulnerable to breaches inconfidentiality, often unintended. the risk is increased in situations where thenumber of individuals is small and the individuals are readily recognized byothers in the community. if a project targets a particular rural county or indianreservation, for instance, there may be only one or a few individuals with aparticular characteristic (e.g., giving birth to twins) and these individuals wouldbe readily identified in the local situation even if their identity were effectivelyhidden from strangers.at the same time, the risk of loss of the confidentiality veil and exposure tostigma is increased for the individuals and for the community as a whole if thebest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations59protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.community is relatively small and its members are readily recognized asmembers by the majority society. it would be important for those irbs that reviewsuch research to consider concern for the community as a whole, but might beeffected through protection of individual members, since u.s. legal traditioncontemplates privacy as belonging to individuals, not groups. for example, astudy designed to assess the need for certain health services can at the same timehave the effect of identifying the community with a negatively valuedcharacteristic (such as underuse of prenatal care or, more strongly, drug oralcohol abuse during pregnancy as evidenced by neonatal symptoms). in thiscase, all members of the community where the need has been shown may sufferstigma even if not involved in the study or not possessing the characteristic inquestion.the risk may be increased still further by the presence of culturallysignificant identifiers that are not recognized as sensitive private information byresearchers who are not familiar with the community and therefore do not maskall the sensitive data fields. for example, specific locations, occupations, or othercharacteristics may indicate a very small subgroup even within a minoritycommunity (e.g., a few members of a particular tribe on a reservation inhabitedprimarily by another tribe), so that those individuals could be unintentionallyidentified. similarly, among some native americans, revealing the name of aparticular lodge or other immediate grouping could be considered an invasion ofprivacy.dr. freeman of the indian health service irb pointed out that many suchmistakes could be avoided by consulting with the community for unanticipatedrisks to privacy (see appendix b). for example, the name of the lodge need notbe disclosed in a publication; the site of the study might be identified simply as atribe in a certain state. dr. freeman also noted that a minority community may beparticularly apt to worry about mistreatment from researchers, and any perceivedmistreatment at the hands of one researcher will have negative impact on theability of future researchers to gain community cooperation. members of thecommittee also noted that there may be no generally agreedupon spokesperson torepresent the community, but even if there are multiple overlapping groupsinvolved, the irb could ensure that the investigator had consulted severalrepresentatives and at least had some input even if it is not possible to have adefinitive or comprehensive statement.the committee found that the particular issues of the use of minors as subjectsare connected mainly with informed consent and assent by the subjects. specificcases in which children are at elevated risk, however, such as when they havebeen removed from their parents due to domestic violence, demand additionalcare and protection for these vulnerable subjects.the committee found that when children are the subjects of hsr that makessecondary use of previously collected data, there are situations in which the risksof breach of confidentiality may go beyond the risks existing for adult subjects. insuch situations, investigators and irbs should take special care to ensure thatbest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations60protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.these vulnerable subjects are protected. in the type of hsr addressed in thisstudy, including analysis of data collected for some other purpose, informedconsent for each study is generally not practicable and the challenge forresearchers is to build in appropriate confidentiality protections so that the risk tosubjects will truly be minimal. as discussed in appendix c, ﬁminorsﬂ is not ahomogeneous class, and the potential for psychosocial risks such asembarassment vary with age within the class. in many cases, the when risk ofconfidentiality breach in general has been minimized effectively, the committeesees no greater risk to minors, in respect of their being minors, than to any othersubject. in specific cases, such as perhaps research on domestic violence andfoster care, individual children might be identifiable because they are in arelatively small group. furthermore, if subjects are identified, they may be at riskfor being removed from a parent or guardian even though better placementoptions may not be available. thus, the confidentiality of these subjects' identityshould receive extra scrutiny. it is also true that records research might revealpatterns of injury, perhaps allowing abuse of a child to be detected and stopped.the committee also found that certain variables, such as hospitalizations, are somuch rarer among minors than among older adults that special consideration forprotecting the confidentiality of these variables as potential identifiers iswarranted. as with the previous finding regarding subjects who are members ofsmall minority communities, protecting the confidentiality of data on minors willbe enhanced by an irb whose members or consultants are knowledgeable aboutthe particular issues of a study and about the relevant developmental changes ofthe minor subjects involved, and can help highlight variables of unusualidentifying potential.recommendation 33. irbs should redesign applications and forms (paperand electronic) tailored to hsr that analyzes data originally collected forother purposes and then distribute them widely (e.g., post them online) toassist investigators in writing the human subjects sections of their hsrproposals and in preparing applications for irb review. irbs should beknowledgeable about the differences between hsr and clinical research,and any forms developed should reflect these differences.a checklist or logical series of questions lays out the criteria that theinstitution has adopted to determine, for example, what constitutes research.these instruments are useful in several ways: they call the attention ofinvestigators to ethical issues arising in hsr, and they help investigators to thinkthrough systematically the specific issues regarding irb review, patient consent,and protection of confidentiality.interactive forms and checklists can make irb review more effective andefficient. investigators can see if their projects might meet criteria for waiver ofinformed consent, expedited review, or exemption from review. if necessary, theinvestigators can revise their study without the delays involved in resubmitting arevised hard copy of the protocol to the irb and waiting for review by the irbbest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations61protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.staff or a board member. such forms would allow irbs to focus their review,again by drawing attention to difficult cases. overall, interactive forms wouldenhance compliance with irb policies and federal regulations and would makereview less burdensome for investigators and irb members alike.the committee found that some organizations make use of interactive onlineforms to help investigators determine whether a project should be consideredresearch and whether it qualifies for expedited review.in general the committee was favorably impressed with organizations suchas rand that had devised interactive online forms to minimize investigator timeand paperwork requirements.rand has implemented an online system to help ensure that there isappropriate irb review of all protocols. the brief online questionnaire inbox 31 initially helps the investigator determine whether the project mightrequire irb review. if the questionnaire so indicates, then a more detailedquestionnaire helps the investigator explore the alternatives of exemption fromirb review, expedited review, or full review see (figure 2, appendix b). theonline system may indicate that a project would not fall into the category of fullirb review if it uses only anonymous or public use datasets, or deidentifieddatasets if neither rand nor any another party on the contract has access to theidentifiers. in addition, the irb is notified whenever a project receives aninternal funding account numberšin fact, assigning such a number automaticallytriggers a message to the investigator to start the questionnaire. the system isdesigned to be inclusive, that is, to send any borderline cases to irb members forspecific attention. in more difficult situations, the irb chair and/or selectedmembers would have to decide whether the particular project could be exempt.examples of situations in which an irb members would have to become involvedto decide whether further irb review might be needed include projects that willuse anonymous or nonsensitive primary data gathered through surveys,interviews, or other methods requiring a direct interaction with subjects; projectsthat gather data from public officials or candidates; or intervention research thatis anonymous and without risk.the committee did not hear of comparable automation in a university settingbut found that automating the burden of paperwork as much as possible wouldincrease compliance and reduce burdens on both investigators and irbs. just asincreased protections come at the price of increased investment in equipment andexpertise, so would it be necessary for organizations to invest in irb operationsimprovements to increase their efficiency.as has been mentioned, the committee concluded that, principalinvestigators intending to involve human subjects should not be in the position ofexempting themselvesšwith or without forms and guidance documents; rather,the protocol should receive at least some outside review. at the same time, formssuch as those by rand would be helpful in facilitating prompt and highqualityreview. the design and dissemination help the institution, the irb, andbest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations62protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the investigator systematically approach questions such as whether an activity isresearch. in another example, a universitybased irb showed how the universitywas working to help its investigators ascertain whether projects would beclassified as research or qa and/or qi. there, the investigator is asked toconsider whether the proposed study contains any of the following elements,which the institution has recognized as potentially associated with research ratherthan qa or qi:characteristics of projects using hsr methods that are research, not qa orqi: any previously unknown phenomena information beyond that routinely collected for the patient care inquestionalternative treatments, interventions, or processescurrent processto which might be added:for publication if possiblealthough the committee would wish the irb chair or designee tocorroborate an investigator's assessment of a project as rather than research, thepreparation of systematic materials such as the above list would facilitate review.recommendation 34. irbs should have expertise available (either on thecommittee or through consultants) to evaluate the risks to confidentialityand security in hsr involving data previously collected for some otherpurpose, including the risks of identification of individuals and the physicaland electronic security of data.the committee urges irbs and investigators to consult informationtechnology and data security experts about protecting confidentiality in theirspecific situations. it is not the intent, nor would it be possible, for this committeeor this report to provide an adequate basis for a data security program.the committee found that the irbs would probably benefit from guidance on howconfidentiality can be protected so that irb members have more background onwhat to look for in a protocol.the committee followed the lead of previous iom and national researchcouncil (nrc) reports regarding the question of how to protect confidentialityand considered protecting access to the data per se, as well as protectingindividual subjects by manipulating the data after they have been collected.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations63protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˚˚"˘˚source: excerpted from nrc,1997; pp. 8œ9, box es.1.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations64protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.protections based on controlling access to sensitive data include proceduraldisciplines, such as making data available only under licensure agreements andtraining personnel not to use methods such as fax or internet transmission that arenot secure means of transferring data. other ways of protecting data fromunauthorized access include technical means, such as installing software thatrequires user authentication, and physical protections, such as guarding laptopswith sensitive data while traveling and storing sensitive data where it would besafe from access (which may include storage outside the country for protectionfrom subpoena, although the committee did not ascertain the reliability of thisstrategy).previous reports from the national academies have discussed technicalmeans of protecting data privacy and maintaining confidentiality. for therecord (nrc, 1997); included a detailed list of technical and organizationalmeasures for immediate adoption (see pp. 8œ9, box es.1) to enhanceconfidentiality protection. the technical protections are shown in box 32.the feasibility of these measures was demonstrated in a proofofconceptproject at a large medical center (halamka et al., 1997) by a team including amember of the earlier nrc committee (peter szolovits, also a member of thiscommittee). the committee emphasizes that this report is not the place torecommend a detailed data security program but suggests that irbs consider theprotective measures already described and implement them if they have not doneso. the committee also emphasizes that increased protection comes at anincreased cost, which requires investment, generally in both equipment andexpertise, by the organizations conducting research.protections based on manipulating the form of the data after collection havealso received detailed examination in previous nrc reports. private lives andpublic policies (nrc, 1993) addressed the confidentiality and accessibility ofgovernmentheld statistics generally and recommended confidentiality measuresincluding datamasking techniques such as topcoding (setting an upper limit on arange of values [e.g., age 70 and over], so as to avoid reporting increasingly rareoutlying values in ranges where they would be isolatedšsee box 33 for otherexamples). many of these measures are also feasible for handling data in general,not only governmentheld databases. as with any manipulation, however, eachtechnique has disadvantages as well as advantages, so the committee emphasizesthat it is important for the investigator to have flexibility in applying thetechniques best suited to the particular research question and dataset(s) of theprotocol.again, the committee emphasizes that this study could not undertakedetailed presentation of datamasking techniques, but suggests that investigatorsand irbs consider the protective measures already described and implement themwhere possible if they have not done so. ideally, these technical and datamaskingsafeguards for confidentiality would be implemented in the context of policiesand procedures adopted by the organization for all uses of personal healthinformation, including clinical care, business activities, or research. the chair ofthe private lives and public policies committee (george duncan, alsobest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations65protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of a member of this committee) noted that many government agencies includingthe bureau of the census and the national center for health statistics havesignificant experience with the release of data with confidentiality protections andshould be consulted in future work.this committee notes that it may also be helpful for investigators and irbsto have access to specific lists of potential direct identifiers for removal. suchlists of procedures and specific identifiers may, however, never be exhaustiveand, as stated in the previous finding, a set of guaranteed conditions may not bepossible.*the committee found that some organizations provide irbs and investigatorsaccess to experts in information technology.rand has installed a threeperson privacy team as part of its irb. the teamincludes an information resource specialist (who specializes in security measuressuch as encryption and creating codes to substitute for identifying data), a datalibrarian (who specializes in rules and practices for dealing with large datasetsacquired from other organizations), and a networks specialist (who specializes inconditions and limitations of safe data transfer over the network). theseprofessionals help design and implement datasafeguarding plans commensuratewith the level of risk for various protocols. the committee concluded that in lightof rapid developments in information technology (it), such access to expertise ininformation technology is highly desirable.most irbs do not, however, have the power or resources to implement datasecurity programs on their own, and their time must be devoted to reviewingresearch proposals, protocols, and annual reports. what irbs can do is rejectstudies that do not have acceptable data security measures, while at the same timeworking to understand the value of reductions in the incidence and severity ofsecurity breaks relative to the cost of increased security precautions. the host*as an example of a good beginning of a list for identifiers to be wary of, the committeereferred to 164.506(d)(2)(ii)(a) of the proposed rule (dhhs, 1999). the list includesname; address; names of relatives or employers; birth date; telephone, fax number, oremail address; medical record; health plan beneficiary, account, certificate/licensenumber; vehicle or other device serial numbers; web universal resource locator; internetprotocol address number; voice or fingerprints; photographs; or any other uniqueidentifying number characteristic or code that the covered entity has reason to believe maybe available to an anticipated recipient of the information. the confidentiality of data thatwere deidentified to this extent would be better protected, but as noted, the data mightstill allow the probabilistic identification of persons by inference with other data sources.the proposed rule accounts for this possibility with an additional condition stipulating thatif data are to be disclosed, then the covered entity must have no reason to believe that anyanticipated recipient of such information could use the information, alone or incombination with other information, to identify an individual. as has been noted,however, this condition may be impossible to satisfy.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations66protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organization and research sites are usually the loci of data security programs.these organizations determine their own level of investment in it and levels ofaffordable data security. the committee therefore concluded that irbs shouldobtain consulting services from data security experts to gain better understandingof the expected yield in reduction of the likelihood of breakins to a secured datasystem produced by alternative security programs.recommendation 35. institutions that carry out hsr and train healthservices researchers should require that trainees, investigators, and irbmembers receive education, with updates as technology changes, regardingthe protection of privacy and confidentiality when using data previouslycollected for another use.education is critical not only for irb members, but also for researchers,technicians, and any other employees who may come in contact with healthinformation. better education about how to protect confidentiality and possiblesources of risk will help investigators design better confidentiality protection intotheir proposed studies from the start. better education of all employees who maycome in contact with the data will help raise the level of understanding andalertness throughout the organization.the committee found that organizations vary in how they educate irb membersabout research ethics and federal guidelines. the committee found that learningon the job may be inadequate preparation for irb members.the committee heard at the workshop that some irbs have apparently nothad the opportunity to gain experience with hsr and may ask for incongruouschanges. some organizations provide training for irb members in formal coursesor seminars, or by providing orientation materials (oprr, 1993). severalorganizations send members to professional meetings and seminars, such as thosesponsored by the organization public responsibility in medicine and research(prim&r). certainly informal education from more experienced irb membersand administrators provides continuing training during irb meetings. as notedearlier, the oig has already observed that irbs are facing greatly expandedworkloads, including new types of research, and do not always have access toeither the expert personnel or the training they would need in order to dealeffectively with some of this research. at the same time, irbs often face seriousresource limitations, which in turn affect training.the question of the ohrp's role in irb member education was raised at theworkshop, not only disseminating regulations as the office currently does, butalso the possibility of ohrp's collecting and disseminating information about thebest practices of irbs. dr. puglisi, representing ohrp, said that information andguidance are posted on the ohrp website, and that the ohrp is activelyexpanding its educational activities.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations67protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˝ˇ˝˘ˇbest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations68protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ˇthe committee found that some organizations require training of investigators inresearch ethics and irb procedure.many investigators in hsr are initially trained in a variety of disciplines,including clinical medicine, pharmacy, epidemiology, and health administration,but rarely specific programs in hsr. training investigators as well as irbmembers may greatly enhance human subjects protection and speed the initiationof good research. educational activities must, however, be designed to target theneeds and time constraints of adult learners who are also busy researchers. inparticular, training should be tailored to the type of research methods thatresearchers usešthe ideal training for clinical trials investigators would not behelpful for health services researchers. several organizations require, or areplanning to require that investigators pass a course on human subjects protectionbefore their protocols can be reviewed. nih already requires that intramuralinvestigators pass an online course on research ethics and regulations. thecommittee believes such education should be encouraged and expanded, providedthat this is feasible for the already heavy schedule of most investigators. thecommittee heard some promising ideas about how to provide this training, suchas online tutorials, but several members noted that there could be resistance atsome institutions to making any training a requirement, because of the heavyworkload that many investigators already carry.in addition to formal courses, irbs play an important role in educatinginvestigators through individual discussions regarding specific projects. irbadministrators and chairs participating in the workshop reported that theirorganizations function more effectively as collaborative educators than whentrying to function as enforcers and that collaboration also effectively reduces theneed for enforcement.recommendation 36. health care or other organizations that disclose oruse personally identifiable health information for any purpose includingresearch or other activities using hsr methods should have comprehensivepolicies, procedures and other structuresbest practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations69protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to protect the confidentiality of health information and should have in placeappropriate strong and enforceable sanctions against breaches of healthinformation confidentiality.access to specific expertise and enhanced general education are important,but the committee also observed that the human element of the researchenterprise necessarily includes human potential for error and even malfeasance.therefore organizations should complement and support the proactive strategiesof expertise and education for better confidentiality protection with deterrents towrongdoing. such sanctions ought to be graded according to the offense (e.g.,whether the incident was a simple mistake or an intentional violation) and shouldapply not only to researchers but to all employees of the organization.best practices for irb review of health services research subject tofederal regulations70protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4best practices for irb or other reviewboard oversight of health servicesresearch not necessarily subject to federalregulationsthis chapter presents the recommendations and findings of the committeeregarding the practices of organizations conducting research or qualityassessment or quality improvement activities that are not necessarily subject tofederal regulations. the committee collected information from health careprovider organizations (intermountain health care and healthpartners), apharmacy benefit management company (express scripts), and the epidemiologysection of a pharmaceutical company (merck). the committee heard testimony ata public workshop and collected materials and statements from theseorganizations (appendix a and appendix b).as in the previous chapter, the reader should note that the committee wasnot able to conduct a comprehensive survey of private organizations that utilizehealth information, much less to collect all their practices for maintainingconfidentiality. the recommendations and findings that follow are based oninformation from various organizations, but neither the committee nor theinformants make any claim to be representative of the entire segment of theindustry. the committee presents these recommendations and findings in thehope that they may be helpful to some organizations and may inform andstimulate further work in this area. the committee believes that studies involvinghuman subjects should be reviewed similarly whether the study is subject tocommon rule provisions or not. as a result, the committee has recommendationsin this chapter that are similar to those in the chapter 3. the committee decided tokeep two separate chapters in part because the implications of therecommendations mightbest practices for irb or other review board oversight of healthservices research not necessarily subject to federal regulations71protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be different for different types of organizations, and also because the separatestructure seemed to reflect the committee's charge more clearly.the committee was impressed with the commitment to privacy andconfidentiality that the representatives of several private companies presented atthe workshop. companies appear to be at different stages of developing internalprivacy or confidentiality policies regarding hsr and should be encouraged tocontinue to develop these organizational policies and procedures. the committeebelieves this recommendation to be consistent with the spirit of proposed federalregulations on privacy (dhhs, 1999). it is, however, outside the scope of thisproject to make a detailed critique of those regulations.recommendationsrecommendation 41. researchers should have all hsr reviewed by an irbor other review board regardless of the source of support or whether theresearch is subject to pertinent federal regulations.recommendation 42. irbs and other boards that review hsr that is notsubject to federal regulation should assess their practices in comparisonwith the best practices of irbs working under pertinent federal regulationsand, when the latter offer improvements, adopt them. alternatively, whentheir own practices are superior though not subject to federal regulation,they should share them with irbs applying the common rule.irbs, or other suitable review bodies, offer a review of research projects byknowledgeable persons not directly associated with the project. this independentreview protects subjects of research because independent reviewers may identifyconcerns and suggest ways to minimize risks that were not apparent toinvestigators. the committee heard several examples of protocols that were orcould have been substantially improved with respect to confidentiality byrelatively simple modifications. research subjects, who undergo risks for thebenefit of science and society as a whole, should have the protections of suchindependent review as a matter of ethical best practice, regardless of fundingsource. there is little ethical justification for making a distinction between thelevel of protection afforded subjects in federally funded projects and that givensubjects in projects funded by private sources if the risks to these subjects arecomparable; indeed, proprietary projects could have additional conflictofinterest pressures and thus might greatly benefit from outside review.the committee found that some organizations and their irbs apply the federalregulations to all health services research, regardless of funding source eventhough they are not legally required to do so.best practices for irb or other review board oversight of healthservices research not necessarily subject to federal regulations72protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee commends this consistent approach and notes that welldesigned review operations, procedures, and practices, some of which arehighlighted in the previous chapter, should allow the extension of irb or otherreview board oversight without creating significant additional burdens forresearchers or review boards. in addition, this would allow both researchers andpotential subjects to benefit from a review that is independent of the study staff,for instance, by identifying potential investigatorœsubject communicationproblems early on.the committee believes that the best practices identified in the previouschapter are feasible to implement in electronic data systems, provided that theinstitution has the resources to do so and that implementing them cansubstantially increase confidentiality. in general, the techniques mentioned areﬁpracticesﬂ precisely because they are already in use at some institution (see alsohalamka et al., 1997). these practices include using codes, rather than identifierssuch as social security numbers or names, to locate a record and a variety ofmeasures to reduce the likelihood that individuals can be identified by inference.in particular, the committee recommends the following observations fromthe previous chapter to institutions that do hsr and similar work that is notsubject to federal regulations.as in recommendation 32, irbs or other review boards should developlists of principles, policies, and best practices on protecting privacy andconfidentiality in hsr for use by investigators. because the identifiability of datain hsr is a continuum, so that absolute guarantees of confidentiality areimpossible, it is critical to take all reasonable steps that can synergisticallyenhance confidentiality, such as the areas of consideration listed in box 32 andbox 33.as noted in recommendation 33, the committee suggests that thedevelopment and online posting of applications and review forms specificallydesigned for hsr would improve the quality of review of hsr projects. irbsand other review boards in any setting should be educated about the differencesbetween hsr and clinical research, and any forms developed should reflect thesedifferences.as mentioned in recommendation 34, irbs or other review boards shouldhave available expertise (either on the committee or through consultants) toevaluate the risks to confidentiality and security in hsr, including the risks ofidentification of individuals and the physical security of data. the committeeurges review boards and investigators in any setting to consult informationtechnology experts about protecting confidentiality in their specific situations. itis not the intent of, nor would it be possible for, this committee or this report toprovide an adequate basis for a data security program.also, as stated in recommendation 35, organizations should require thatresearchers and other employees who come in contact with confidential healthinformation receive education in the handling of this information to maintainconfidentiality.the committee concluded that principal investigators intending to involvehuman subjects in research or for other types of investigations should not be inbest practices for irb or other review board oversight of healthservices research not necessarily subject to federal regulations73protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the position of exempting themselves; rather, the protocol should receive at leastsome outside review. such a check by knowledgeable, independent individualswill facilitate consistently high standards of treatment for all confidential healthinformation in research and for all subjects whose data are so used.recommendation 43. health care organizations that conduct projectsapplying the methods of hsr to personally identifiable health informationfor purposes such as qa or qi, disease management, and core businessfunctions as well as for research should have comprehensive policies,procedures, and other structures to protect privacy when personal healthinformation is used for research or other purposes.intermountain health care, a large, integrated health care organization,reported that most violations of confidentiality occurred outside the researcharena, in areas such as clinical care and business activities. this distribution isnot surprising, because most uses of personal health information are in thesenonresearch areas. from the viewpoint of the patient, it does not matter whether aviolation of confidentiality occurs in a research project or other activity becausethe risks of being harmed or wronged may be the same. publicity about violationsor alleged violations of confidentiality undermines public confidence in bothhealth care operations and research.the committee found that companies that purchase, deliver, and/or reimbursehealth care services could likely engage in many activities that analyze personalhealth information using the same techniques as hsr, which fall into the ﬁgrayzoneﬂ between research and nonresearch described in the workshop summary(see figure 3 in appendix b).as detailed in the earlier report for the record (nrc, 1997, see especially,pp. 66œ68, table 3.3), health care organizations use personal health informationfor clinical care, billing, payment, quality improvement, and business planning.the need to make personal health information accessible for these purposes mustbe balanced with the need to respect the confidentiality of such information.the committee found that some organizations have developed comprehensivepolicies and procedures regarding the confidentiality of personal healthinformation that are best practices. these comprehensive policies apply toresearch as well as to other activities making use of personally identifiabledata.a comprehensive program has several facets: organizational componentssuch as a privacy board that recommends and implements policies; proceduralcomponents including an active training and enforcement program for allemployees, technical components such as the use of audit trails to detectunauthorizedbest practices for irb or other review board oversight of healthservices research not necessarily subject to federal regulations74protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uses of personal health information; and a suitable board to review researchprojects. comprehensive organizational privacy policies and procedures apply toresearchers as well as clinicians and administrative staff. a review board can bemore certain that confidentiality is protected in research if the organization has astrong, comprehensive policy.the committee heard that intermountain health care (ihc) has aninformation security committee that may be similar to the privacy boardsdescribed in the proposed rule. the ihc information security committee (iisc)is constituted similarly to an irb, including community members, as well as lineadministrators, researchers, and computer specialists. the iisc works closelywith the irb on activities on the hsr side of the continuum. the iisc is alsoresponsible for determining whether projects from the ambiguous area in themiddle of the health care operations/research spectrum should proceed to seekirb review. finally, the iisc generates and recommends data security policies tothe board of trustees of the company and then helps implement these policiesand procedures throughout the organization, thus enhancing confidentialityprotections at the operations end of the continuum.recommendation 44. health care or other organizations that disclose oruse personally identifiable health information for any purpose including qaor qi, disease management, and core business functions as well as forresearch should have in place appropriate, strong, and enforceablesanctions against breaches of the confidentiality of health information.committee members agreed that previous experience provides ampleevidence that, although most investigators and staff are upstanding, there willalways be a few who are subject to the temptation to misuse access toconfidential information. in fact, the committee felt that this aspect of humansubjects protection may have been neglected and therefore recommendsconsideration of deterrent policies for organizations working with irbs under thecommon rule and for the organizations considered here. such individuals and,even more, the subjects of any research projects that they may come in contactwith, would benefit from a credible threat of sanctions for improper use orinspection of confidential information. such sanctions ought to be gradedaccording to the offense, (e.g., whether the incident was a simple mistake or anintentional violation) and should apply not only to researchers but to allemployees of the organization. just as in organizations that have irbs, it isimportant that the proactive approaches of expertise and education toward properhandling of confidential information also be complemented and supported withsanctions against mishandling information.the committee heard at the workshop that at the personnel level, all ihcemployees must sign a confidentiality agreement, which must be renewed everytwo years, and then comply with a ﬁneedtoknowﬂ policy limiting who hasaccess to which data. the company also tracks data access with automaticelectronicbest practices for irb or other review board oversight of healthservices research not necessarily subject to federal regulations75protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˚source: nrc, 1997. page 9, box es.1.logs and has designed the electronic records system to ensure thatidentifiable portions are accessible only to designated employees. ihc terminatesemployment because of privacy infractions.many of the provisions in recommendations 43 and 44 are consistent withthe recommendations regarding organizational practices discussed in for therecord (nrc, 1997) and quoted in box 41. as noted in chapter 3, thecommittee emphasizes that a complete analysis of organizational structures andbest practices for irb or other review board oversight of healthservices research not necessarily subject to federal regulations76protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.processes to enhance the maintenance of confidentiality is beyond the scope ofthis project but recommends that organizations consider these practices andimplement them as appropriate, if they have not already done so.the committee encourages health care organizations to adopt provisions thatare practicable in their circumstances. comprehensive policies for all uses ofpersonal health information will avoid issues of how to oversee activities that arein the gray zone between research and qa or qi. if a comprehensive policy is inplace, a qa or qi project will have strong confidentiality safeguards that makethe risk to patients minimal.best practices for irb or other review board oversight of healthservices research not necessarily subject to federal regulations77protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5recommendations for next stepsﬁthe end of this study will not be the end of studying [the issue of privacyand confidentiality in health services research],ﬂ said dr. michael fitzmaurice ofthe department of health and human services' (dhhs') agency for healthcareresearch and quality (ahrq), one of the agencies sponsoring this study, duringthe committee's workshop. the committee endeavored to stay strictly within thefocused charge for the project. in the course of the study, however, the committeeidentified many important issues in addition to institutional review board (irb)practices that should be addressed if subjects of health services research (hsr)are to be protected adequately. throughout this report the committee has tried torefer inclusively to irbs and/or other review boards (unless circumstancesspecified only irbs). the term ﬁirbﬂ has regulatory implications of theextension of federal oversight in a new area. the term ﬁprivacy boardﬂ has beenused in a rule that, as this report was being written, had been proposed but notfinalized and may mean different things to different people.the committee has also tried to emphasize that any hsr should be reviewedaccording to the ethical principles reflected in the federal regulations and furtherthat the reviewers should be knowledgeable about hsr and privacy protectionand should be independent of the research group. although not all hsr is in factsubject to federal regulations, the committee concluded that the review of hsrought to follow the principles of these regulations.recommendations for next steps78protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendationsrecommendation 51. institutions whose irbs or other review boardsreview hsr should ensure adequate administrative support and fundingfor review bodies and should incorporate improving review operations intooverall institutional strategic planning, and organizations that sponsor hsrshould also support designating adequate funds for such review.the committee corroborated previous reports that questioned whether irbshave the resources to carry out their mission. the committee noted especially theapril 2000 update report of the dhhs office of the inspector general, (oig).this report, protecting human research subjects: status of recommendations,concluded that the resource problems identified in the oig's 1998 report,institutional review boards: a time for reform, still exist. the committee heardthat many irbs already have a heavy workload of proposals for review and thatmost members serve in a voluntary capacity. additional resources will berequired to implement the best practices described in chapter 3 and chapter 4.the committee found that irbs (or any other review boards) need adequatefunding specifically to review hsr.as just mentioned, previous reports have documented the need for adequatefunding of irbs. the committee heard corroborating evidence that resourcescontinue to be a problem for irbs. a recent committee at the university ofcalifornia at san francisco, an institution conducting a great deal of researchinvolving human subjects, recommended that high priority be given to adequateirb staff support, increased use of computerized information systems, andincreased funding for training investigators about irb function (see alsoappendix b).in addition to adequate resources for staff and committee members, irbs orother review boards need additional funding for new activities that could maketheir work more effective and efficient. with regard to hsr, for example, reviewcommittees need access to more expertise in information technology, such as howinvestigators can reduce the likelihood that subjects will be identified through theuse of coding and encryption and through defining variables in ways thateliminate data cells having a small number of subjects with an unusual set ofcharacteristics. furthermore, human subjects protection programs will requireadditional resources to put into place the kinds of computer decision supportsystems that would enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of reviews of hsrstudies and better ensure that these studies have in place appropriate safeguardsfor confidentiality.the committee also heard a number of proposals for how to provide theresources that human subjects protection committees would need to carry outtheir missions adequately. dr. james kahn, irb chair at the university ofcalifornia in san francisco, proposed that irb review be added as a line item ingrants,recommendations for next steps79protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.doubting that sufficient overhead funds would be directed to irb support at alarge university that has many other competing uses of overhead funds (thisproposal is very similar to that suggested in the 1998b and 2000 oig reports).some committee members argued that support of the irb, manifestly a necessaryoverhead cost of supporting a human subjects research program, is a particularlyappropriate use of overhead funds. in fact, dr. kahn reported that ucsf hadcommissioned an ad hoc committee to review the ucsf irb's function. the adhoc committee was asked to consider the composition, procedures, and support ofthe irb and whether it could be of better service to the university. the committeereturned a list of recommendations, including several suggestions aboutincreasing the use of electronic information systems, as well as increased trainingfor researchers to address both research responsibilities and institutionalprocedures, and increasing staff support for the human subjects protectionprogram. in addition, dr. kahn specifically suggested designating 1 to 1.5percent of each grant using human subjects to be earmarked as funding for thehuman subjects protection program. independent irbs, of course, chargeinvestigators or institutions a set fee to review protocols.determining the resource needs of irbs and analyzing how to provide thenecessary support in different organizational contexts, although far beyond thescope of this report, are important issues that must be addressed. groups such asthe american association of medical colleges (aamc), public responsibility inmedicine and research (prim&r), and applied research ethics nationalassociation (arena) can play key roles in addressing these issues. particularattention has to be given to how to support innovative uses of computertechnology that would make irb review less burdensome and help traininvestigators in research ethics and irb requirements.recommendation 52. the dhhs and other federal departments andprivate organizations such as the association of american medical colleges(aamc), the association for health services research (ahsr, but nowknown as the academy for health services research and health policy),the american college of epidemiology (ace), the international society forpharmacoepidemiology (ispe), public responsibility in medicine andresearch (prim&r), the applied research ethics national association(arena), and others should continue or expand educational effortsregarding the protection of the confidentiality of personally identifiablehealth information in research.while these recommendations highlight dhhs as the sponsor of this studyand a major sponsor of relevant research, the recommendations should be appliedby other common rule signatory departments and agencies as well. thecommittee believes that the approach of identifying best practices for irboversight of hsr is a fruitful one that should be further developed.recommendations of best practices will provide more specific guidance toinvestigators andrecommendations for next steps80protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.irb members than is currently available. this approach draws its strength fromthe commitment of both irb members and administrators and of researchers toprotecting the rights and welfare of the subjects of hsr. both irbs and scientistshave developed useful practices that, if more widely adopted, could lead toimproved protection of confidentiality and privacy, without creating undueburdens. private organizations can play a crucial role in developing andpublicizing best practices. professional societies such as ahsr, ace, and ispeare composed of investigators who carry out studies analyzing large databases ofdata previously collected for other uses. aamc represents medical schools thattrain researchers and carry out a great deal of hsr. prim&r and arenamembers review hsr studies and help educate investigators about the protectionof human subjects. all of these organizations can help identify and disseminatebest practices for the protections of privacy and confidentiality in hsr.ultimately, such best practices for data security or confidentiality protectionshould be developed for each of the other specific types of data collectionmethods used in hsr including, but not limited to, focus groups, mail surveys,telephone surveys, personal interviews, home visits, interactive data collectionvia the web, and remote sensing, as well as secondary analysis of health data thathave already been collected for some other purpose.the committee found enthusiasm and openness to new ideas on the part of theirbs and investigators who participated.the committee was impressed that in the spirit of scientific collaboration andcompetition, many health services researchers, irb members, and irbadministrators were receptive to good ideas and wanted to excel in how theyprotect confidentiality in hsr. as with any other aspect of research, there is agreat deal to be gained when people from different institutions exchange ideasand experiences. these stakeholders recognize that public confidence thatpersonally identifiable health information will be used appropriately is crucial tothe continued ability to carry out important hsr projects in a timely fashion. thecommittee found that these stakeholders were dedicated to resolving the tensionbetween confidentiality and access to personally identifiable health informationfor hsr in an ethically acceptable manner.the committee observed that the general willingness of irb administrators,chairs, investigators, and organizations whose research is not subject to federalregulations to participate in its workshop and to consider and try ideas that hadbeen developed at other institutions indicates that the distribution of informationon best practices would likely be well received. such recommendations should betransmitted to investigators and irbs through the internet, as well as throughpresentations at professional society meetings and workshops, and in trainingrecommendations for next steps81protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.grants and awards, program grants, and center grants.1 this committee, becauseof the time frame, could take only the first steps in identifying best practices forirb review of hsr. further efforts, including more systematic input from irbsand health services researchers, could lead to more specific and comprehensivesuggestions for institutions and investigators to adopt.the difficulty in the dissemination of information about best practicesidentified through this approach may be in locating a central venue and keeping itup to date. the dhhs can promote interactions among scientists and irbs thatwill lead to wider dissemination of good ideas regarding the oversight of hsrand protection of the subjects of hsr. through its roles in funding hsr,supporting training programs in hsr, and overseeing human subjects protection,the dhhs can have great impact on strengthening irb review of hsr whileallowing valuable research to proceed. in the long run, greater public confidencethat personally identifiable health information is adequately safeguarded willpromote more support for hsr and perhaps avoid the restrictive legislation andregulation that some european nations have adopted (see for exampleappendix d).the committee found that identifying best practices is a promising approach tostrengthen the protection of hsr, while allowing valuable studies to proceed in atimely and practical manner.the committee found that the federal regulations and the interpretations andguidance issued by ohrp do not provide sufficiently specific guidance for manyissues regarding hsr. as discussed earlier in this report, irbs and investigatorsadmit that they struggle with such difficult concepts as identifiable informationand the definition of hsr. bringing together people who grapple with theseissues is likely to lead to greater agreement and clarity.based on these findings, the committee believes that dhhs should convenemeetings that will facilitate these exchanges of ideas and identify feasible bestpractices that institutions might choose to adopt more widely. the meetingsshould include health services researchers, irb members and administrators,leaders of institutions that carry out hsr, experts in information technology,experts in ethics and law, and public representatives. such interdisciplinaryexpertise will be needed to resolve the complex problems regarding the protectionof subjects of hsr. the working group should draw on the expertise oforganizations that are required to handle sensitive computerized personalinformation in a confidential manner. such organizations would includecommercial firms transacting business over the internet as well as governmentagencies such as the bureau of the census and the national center for healthstatistics. although the committee was unable to consult with these organizationsbecause of time constraints,1informal communication already flourishes through the medical college of wisconsinirb (mcwirb) list serve (see www.mcwirb.org) and should be encouraged and enhancedhowever possible.recommendations for next steps82protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it recognizes that such expertise would be extremely useful to health servicesresearchers.in addition, the committee identified from material presented at theworkshop several topics that require additional discussion. these include how tocontact persons identified through secondary data analysis using large databasesfor more intensive interviews in those instances where it is possible and necessaryto identify and contact subjects (often neither is true of hsr); how to reviewmultisite hsr projects, particularly those carried out in small health careorganizations that do not have irbs; and how to ensure that hsr projectsinvolving children take into account the changing needs, vulnerabilities, andcapacities of children as they mature (see, for example, appendix c).recommendation 53. organizations that furnish health servicesresearchers with personally identifiable health information should ensurethat the data are prepared in a manner that protects confidentialityadequately.the committee heard several instances reported at the workshop where hsrinvestigators requested deidentified data from federal agencies but receiveddata that had not been deidentified because the agency in question lacked theresources to do so.as large holders of personally identifiable data, the situation of federalagencies having to choose between providing data that have not beendeidentified, or simply refusing to provide data for research at all, is worrisome.organizations holding health data should develop and/or implement lists ofpoints to consider in reviewing data requests with respect to protecting privacyand confidentiality in hsr.similarly, either such holders of information should require that the healthservices researcher submit evidence that the proposed research has undergone irbreview, or the data holder should review the study through its own independentreview process.committee members observed further that if data suppliers possessed morehighly developed data warehouses so that investigators could always go back tothe source to pick up forgotten variable(s), health services researchers would bemore likely to ask for only those variables they really believe they will need.when data requests are limited to a onetime, takewhatyouneed process,investigators are prone to ask for much more than they expect to need just in casethey might be forgetting something.recommendation 54. the funders of hsr should be willing to cover thecost of preparing personally identifiable health information that is collectedin clinical care, billing, or payment so that confidentiality can be adequatelyprotected in hsr.recommendations for next steps83protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the committee found that health services researchers and other data handlersneed sufficient funding to protect adequately the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information.the committee heard examples of how health services researchers lacked theresources to adopt computerbased measures that would strengthen confidentialityin important hsr. for example, a health services researcher at a leadingacademic hospital reported that she was finding it increasingly difficult to obtainconsultation from their excellent medical informatics group because these expertswere overcommitted to other projects.the committee concluded that adequate resources to consult with and payfor the services of computer experts will be essential if confidentiality is to beadequately protected in hsr. in most cases, funders of hsr will have to allowsuch computer consultation and services as line items in grants. the need for suchsupport should be accepted as an integral cost of highquality hsr.recommendation 55. the dhhs should continue and expand efforts toencourage holders of personally identifiable health information to make thisinformation available to researchers as public use files after suitableapplication of techniques to minimize the risks of identifiability.if an organization holding health data has made a dataset publicly availablewithout restriction, as is done with the national health interview survey (nhis),then projects using only such data can be considered minimal risk and eligible forexemption per 45 cfr 46.101(b)(5). in order to promote hsr, dataholdingorganizations should consider making as much data available in the publicdomain as is safely possible. the committee notes that the interagencyconfidentiality and data access group has developed a checklist for use inconsidering whether data may be released, which helps holders of data developsuch public use files.2 this group is affiliated with the federal committee onstatistical methodology, an interagency committee first convened in 1975 anddedicated to improving the quality of federal statistics.recommendation 56. the ahrq should consider supporting a feasibilitystudy on developing procedures for facilitating linkage of separate data filescontaining sensitive data from different sources to create analytical filessuch that it would be possible for researchers to create linkages that arereliable and informative, and at the same time, to protect the confidentialityof the original data disclosure through deidentification and otherprotective measures so as to save2confidentiality and data access committee, federal committee on statisticalmethodology. checklist on disclosure potential of proposed data releases (july 1999):http://www.fcsm.gov/spwptbco.html.recommendations for next steps84protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the subject from being placed at risk of harm or wrong through improperreidentification.much of the value of retrospective, databaseoriented research comes fromthe ability to draw inferences from data derived from different sources. thecommittee urges interested parties including dhhs agencies to encourageresearch on linkage and anonymization with a view toward two goals: first, tocreate linkages that are reliable and informative, and second, to approach asclosely as possible the goal of anonymized data.the ability to link records to one another may be very important, thoughthat does not mean that the data need to be linked to the identity of theindividual. health care organizations may have to identify episodes of illness in apatient, which may be found in records of emergency room visits, ambulanceservices, hospital stays, operative records, bills from independent medicalproviders, rehabilitation services, pharmacies and pharmacy benefit managers,and so forth. to recognize that the data drawn from these various sources refer tothe same individual, it is important that researchers be able to identify the samepatient in each set of records. this identification allows joining of these variousdatasets into a single (logical) database that contains all relevant data about thepatient. such identification and joining is often difficult and is one of themotivations for keeping names or other direct identifiers in the records. the trueidentity of any given individual is not really necessary to merge databases; allthat is required is some unique identifier, such as a code, which could be difficultto reassociate with the actual patient. ideally, then, the various sources of datawould have their records indexed by the same set of identifiers, but ones that arenot easily reassociated with the actual patient's identity.there are several possible ways to address this problem. one suggestionexploits developing cryptographic and authentication technology to create healthinformation identification systems (as explored in a pilot study of kohane et al.,1998, described in greater detail in box 51). such a system would have theadvantage of allowing different databases to be linked through an identifier thatcould be certified as associating records about the same individual but would bedifficult for any user to decode. as different projects were designed, theinvestigators could specify different types of health identifiers to maximizevalues in various dimensions including the extent to which the identifying codecould be used in other projects and the degree of security surrounding it. sincethe program designed by kohane and colleagues generates identification systems(not a particular identification code), the resulting flexibility and complexity ofthe identifiers would be much less vulnerable to decoding than a single certifiedidentifier such as a social security number, while still allowing database linkage.recommendations for next steps85protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.&%&˚˝!%!1%˚!,%!0%˚"#$˝˚˚˚˚"˚recommendations for next steps86protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˙&˚"#$"#$source: kohane, isaac s.; dong, hongmei; and szolovits, peter. healthinformation identification and deidentification toolkit. proceedings of theamerican medical informatics association symposium 1998: 356œ360.another type of linkage system would depend on trusted third parties to beresponsible for linking the separate data files. these entities could hold the keyslinking individuals to the data. after merging datasets, this entity would then stripoff the identifiers, check that identification cannot be (reasonably) inferred3, andtake any needed steps to protect the data. this approach has the advantage ofbeing simpler to implement, specifically because it requires that many fewerorganizations and individuals develop high degrees of technical competence andorganizational commitment to use standard procedures. the disadvantages arerelated to the centralization of the linkage operation.the committee notes that the question of how precisely to perform the datafile linkage in any particular case is not straightforward but varies depending onthe characteristics of the specific research question and data used. at the sametime, such merges can be technically complex, so access to a central, highly3the committee recognizes that the question of how difficult identifiability by inferencemust be in order to make data safe for release will continue to be a matter of debate andnotes that the standard should be expected to change as technology changes.recommendations for next steps87protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.skilled facility to perform them could improve the overall efficiency of theresearch enterprise. there is, however, an additional theoretical risk that suchtrusted entities, because they are known to hold large amounts of personallyidentifiable health information, may be the target of intruders. thus there is aneed to test the feasibility of this approach, regarding both the capability of acentral facility to be flexible with the technical needs of different types ofprojects and the safety of a central merging facility.recommendation 57. dhhs (ahrq and/or nih) and other federaldepartments or agencies should consider developing and supporting aresearch agenda concerning irb protection of subjects from nonphysicalharms such as risks to privacy and confidentiality in human subjectsresearch (including cultural meanings of privacy and confidentiality).such a research agenda would likely include current irb practice, as well asnew procedures and policies to provide better human subjects protection, and alsowould include monitoring of irb practices. a systematic study of nonphysicalrisk assessment was beyond the charge given to this committee, and thecommittee would in any case have found itself unable to accomplish it due tolimitations of time and in respect of the office of management and budget(omb) rules on extensive surveys. the committee found, however, that suchinformation would be of great use both as a baseline and, if updated periodically,as a basis of continuous policy evaluation. the findings would be of use to irbs,researchers, regulators, and any other parties interested in privacy andconfidentiality.recommendation 58. the ohrp should review the possibility of proposinga change to the regulations with respect to hsr to replace the termsﬁexemptﬂ and ﬁexpediteﬂ with ﬁadministrative review.ﬂthe committee is recommending this review only with respect to hsršthecommittee did not investigate possible consequences for other types of researchthat might be affected if the change were applied to all research on humansubjects. the committee heard several reports that wellintentioned andconscientious researchers may judge a study to be exempt from review under thecurrent regulatory language and therefore never bring it to the attention of areview board. since the committee has concluded that all hsr should receivesome review by a board that is independent of the research project, the committeesuggests that this possibly misleading terminology be avoided. the committeerecognizes, however, that a change to the common rule involves coordinationamong many agencies and may therefore be difficult to achieve. the committeefurther recognizes that others may have other suggestions for a new term. thecommittee's goal in this matter was to offer a term that recognizedrecommendations for next steps88protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that some studies do not need full irb review but did not seem to suggest that theinvestigator should decide what level of irb review is needed.recommendation 59. health services researchers, and institutions thatparticipate in and benefit from hsr, should voluntarily adopt bestpractices for irb review of hsr.the committee found that some policies intended to strengthen confidentialityand privacy may have serious adverse consequences for hsr.the committee found that some nations have adopted laws or regulationsthat allow individuals to exclude their personally identifiable health informationfrom databases, that require written consent from patients for use of healthrecords for research, and that require the anonymization of data for any secondarydata analysis. such measures were enacted to protect the confidentiality ofcomputerized personally identifiable health information (see appendix d).the committee learned, however, that some measures intended to promoteprivacy and confidentiality may have serious adverse consequences for hsr(aamc, 2000; ahsr, 2000). a requirement of individual informed consentwould render impossible valuable hsr, notably projects using hmo, insurer, ormedicare and medicaid databases. furthermore, populationbased studies wouldbe biased if people could exclude themselves from research. even if studies werepossible, their results could be misleading because persons who agree to hsrmay be different in important and unpredictable ways from persons who refuse toparticipate. in addition, a requirement that all secondary data analyses use onlyanonymized data would make it impossible to conduct valuable hsr thatrequires followup of a cohort or the linking of data from different datasets.thus, some measures intended to strengthen privacy and confidentiality may leadto invalid studies and be a poor basis for public policy decisions.if patients and members of the public in general do not find that they cantrust that confidential information will be protected throughout research, they mayseek further measures to protect confidentiality. some such measures could bedetrimental to hsr. the committee therefore urges investigators, data users anddata holders and publishers to voluntarily adopt and continually upgrade the bestpractices of irbs and other review boards in ensuring the protection of dataprivacy and confidentiality in hsr.recommendation 510. all stakeholders in hsr should support strategies toimprove the protection of privacy and confidentiality without impedingresearch.the committee found it necessary to encourage further study beyond thescope of its charge. although there was not time in this project to explore widerranging ideas, the committee suggests several as potential starting points in arecommendations for next steps89protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.multifaceted strategy to improve the awareness of privacy issues and improveconfidentiality protection practices: dhhs could sponsor a conference to include health services researchers,journal editors and editorial boards to discuss inclusion of privacy protectionmethods in journal articles and requiring evidence of irb review as acondition for publication, and hsrrelated journals and health caremanagement journals could sponsor special issues devoted to health dataprivacy and confidentiality and could refuse to publish results from studiesthat had not received irb review. dhhs should investigate revising the public health service grant applicationguidelines to incorporate a formal section on data privacy or confidentialityprotection in the human subjects section of the application. dhhs could include data privacy experts on scientific peer review panelsthat are charged with the review of hsr proposals. funders of hsr, including dhhs, hmos, and private companies andfoundations (perhaps working through a professional organization such asthe ahsr), should consider issuing a special research solicitation on dataprotection methods, to include research on methods of attacking securityprotections. primr and organizations supporting hsr could sponsor a conference on theequitable selection of subjects for research. certain populations may beoversolicited as subjects of current hsr projects, because of availablity ofsuitable databases, federal requirements to have minorities adequatelyrepresented, or policy interest in certain topics, such as the impact of pooraccess to health care. questions for consideration could include whetherparticipation in many studies may increase the risk that confidentiality willbe breached and harms or wrongs occur as a result, and, whether there maybe a risk of stigma if a group is overrepresented in current research, even ifindividual subjects who are members of the groups are at minimal risk forhaving their individual confidentiality violated. universities and colleges should conduct special oneweek courses in datasecurity for students majoring in hsr and related fields. organizations with special interest in data privacy and goodquality hsrshould consider sponsoring a prize competition, perhaps annually, for thebest privacy and confidentiality practices by a health care organization. thismight be akin to the malcolm baldridge national quality award, which hashad such an impact on quality assurance in industry. given the importancecurrently being placed on privacy and the attendant competitive value that anorganization may see in winning such an award, there may well be sufficientincentives for organizations to put forth their best ideas and document themin a way that is understandable. such a prize competition could be seen as apositive side of such awards as the annual uk ﬁbig brotherﬂ awards, whichhighlight egregiousrecommendations for next steps90protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.breeches of privacy,4 but would really be more like the malcolm baldridgeaward in spirit, with health data privacy protection as the focus.the methods of hsr, applied to data previously collected for otherpurposes, have been useful in discovering and demonstrating systemic effects andpopulationlevel trends in the organization and delivery of health services. it isimportant that we, as a society, continue to have access to such research in orderto inform policy making in both private and governmental arenas. at the sametime, it is important that we, as a society, protect the privacy of individuals and ofvulnerable groups, and the confidentiality of information that patients share withhealth care providers. as a result of the present study, the committee hasconcluded that it is possible both to carry out valuable hsr and to protectconfidentiality. however, to do so will require adequate funding. resources areneeded to support dedicated, trained irb members and staff, to establishorganizational confidentiality policies and electronic security practices, to educateresearchers, and to provide statistical and computer expertise. the true test of ourcommitment to the twin values of advancing useful knowledge and protectingconfidentiality is whether we are willing to make the needed investments toachieve both goals.4for the malcolm baldridge national quality award, see http://www.quality.nist.gov.for the big brother awards, see http://www.bigbrotherawards.org/. note that theorganization also recognizes achievements in privacy protection, but generally within theunited kingdom.recommendations for next steps91protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendations for next steps92protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesamdur, robert, speers, marjorie a., and bankert, elizabeth. irb triage of projects that involvemedical record review. in press.applebaum, paul s. threats to the confidentiality of medical recordsšno place to hide. jama.2000 feb 9; 283(6):795œ796.association of american medical colleges. aamc comments on the recommendations of thesecretary of health and human services on the ﬁconfidentiality of individually identifiablehealth information.ﬂ aamc testimony presented to the senate labor and humanresources committee. 1997 nov 10.association for health services research. definitions of health services research. 2000.james bell associates. review draftšfinal report evaluation of nih implementation of section491 of the public health service act, mandating a program of protection of researchsubjects (no1od22109). 1998 may 19.belmont 1979. the belmont report. office of the secretary. ethical principles and guidelines for theprotection of human subjects of research. the national commission for the protection ofhuman subjects of biomedical and behavioral research. 1979 april.bradburn, norman m. populationšbased survey research. presentation done at national bioethicsadvisory commission. 2000 apr 6.brainard, jeffrey. an inside look at how a university tries to protect human subjects. thechronicle of higher education. 2000 mar 17: a31.brooks, john m.; doucette, william, and sorofman, bernard. factors affecting bargainingoutcomes between pharmacies and insurers. health service research selected papers fromthe association for health services research annual meeting, june 21œ23, 1998. 1999apr; 34(1 part ii):439œ451.brown, june gibbs, inspector general. institutional review boards: the emergence of independentboards. department of health and human services, office of inspector general. 1998a jun.references93protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.brown, june gibbs, inspector general. institutional review boards: a time for reform. departmentof health and human services, office of inspector general. 1998b jun.brown, june gibbs, inspector general. protecting human research subjects: status ofrecommendations. department of health and human services, office of inspector general.april 2000.buckovich, suzy a., rippen, helga e., and rozen, michael j. driving toward guiding principles: agoal for privacy, confidentiality, and security of health information. journal of americanmedical informatics association. 1999 marœ1999 apr 30; 6(2):123œ133.california health care foundation. americans worry about the privacy of their computerizedmedical reports. california health care foundation: communicationšpress releases.1999 jan 28.casarett, david; karlawish jason h.t., and sugarman, jeremy. determining when qualityimprovement intiatives should be considered research: proposed criteria and potentialimplications. jama. 2000 may 3; 283(17):2275œ2280.chen, j.; marciniak, t. a.; radford, m. j.; wang, y., and krumholz, h. m. betablocker therapy forsecondary prevention of myocardial infarction in elderly diabetic patients. results from thenational cooperative cardiovascular project. journal of the american college ofcardiology. 1999 nov 1; 34(5):1388œ1394.clancy, carolyn m. and eisenberg, john m. outcomes research; measuring the end results ofhealth care. science (reprint series). 1998 oct 9; 282.cromwell, david m.; bass, eric b.; steinberg, earl p.; yasui, yutaka; ravich, william j.; hendrix,thomas r.; mcleod, susan f., and moore, richard d. can restrictions on reimbursementfor antiulcer drugs decrease medicaid pharmacy costs without increasinghospitalizations? health services research; 33(6):1593œ1610, 1999.dhhs (department of health and human services), and office of the secretary. standards forprivacy of individually identifiable health information; proposed rule. federal register.1999 nov 3; 64(212):59918.edgar, harold and rothman, david j. the institutional review board and beyond: future challengesto the ethics of human experimentation. the milbank quarterly. 1995; 73(4):489œ506.eisenberg, john m. health services research in a marketoriented health care system. healthaffairs media & managed care. 1998 janœ1998 feb 28; 17(1).etzioni, amitai. medical records: enhancing privacy, preserving the common good. hastingscenter report. 1999 marœ1999 apr 30: 14œ23.general accounting office. medical records privacy access needed for health research, butoversight of privacy protections is limited. gaošreport to congressional requesters.1999 feb., gao/hehs9955.general accounting office. scientific research: continued vigilance critical to protecting humansubjects. gaošreport to ranking minority member. 1996 mar., gao/hehs9672.ghpp (health privacy working group). best principles for health privacy. health privacy project;institute for health care research and policy, georgetown university. 1999. availableonline at http://www.healthprivacy.org/latest/bestprinciplesreport.pdf.goldman, janlori, and hudson, zoe. a health privacy primer for consumers exposed. healthprivacy project. institute for health care research and policy. georgetown university.washington, dc. 1999 dec. available online at http://www.healthprivacy.org/resources/exposed.pdf.references94protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goldman, janlori. protecting privacy to improve health care. health affairs. 1998 novœ1998 dec31; 17(64):47œ60.gostin, lawrence o. and hadley, jack. health services research: public benefits, personal privacy,and proprietary interests. annals of internal medicine. 1998 nov 15; 129(10):833œ835.gostin, lawrence o., lazzarini, zita; neslund, verla, and osterholm, michael t. the public healthinformation infrastructure a national review of the law on health information privacy.jama. 1996 jun 26; 275(24):1921œ1927.gross, david j.; alecxih, lisa; gibson, mary jo; corea, john; caplan, craig, and brangan,normandy. outofpocket health spending by poor and nearpoor elderly medicarebeneficiaries. health care research selected papers from the association for healthservices research annual meeting, june 21œ23, 1998. 1999 apr; 34(1 part ii):241œ254.halamka, john d.; szolovits, peter; rind, david, and safran, charles. a www implementation ofnational recommendations for protecting electronic health information. journal of theamerican medical informatics association. 1997; 4(6):458œ464.hanken, mary alice. standards for confidentiality, privacy, access, and data security. topics inhealth information management. 1996 may: 44œ48.iezzoni, lisa. ethical consideration in future health care research: protecting privacy and relatedconcerns. presented at connecting ethics and health policy, bethesda, maryland, oct 1,1999.ivy, andrew c. nazi war crimes of a medical nature. reprinted with permission of the editors fromfederation bulletin. 1947; 33:133œ146 in reiser, stanley j.; dyke, arthur j., and curran,william j. ethics in medicine: historical perspectives and contemporary concerns. mitpress. 1977.iom (institute of medicine). committee on regional health data networks and molla donaldson,and kathleen n. lohr, editors. health data in the information age: use, disclosure, andprivacy. 1994. washington, dc: national academy press.iom (institute of medicine). committee on health services research: training and work forceissues and marilyn j. field, robert e. tranquada and jill c. feasley, editors. healthservices research: work. washington, dc: national academy press. 1995.ispe (international society for pharmacoepidemiology). data privacy, medical recordconfidentiality, and research in the interest of public health. [web page]. 1997 sep 1.available at: http://www.pharmacoepi.org/policy/privacy.htm.jhita (joint healthcare information technology alliance). advocacy paper: medical recordsconfidentiality legislation [web page]. available at: http://www.jhita.org/medical.htm.katz, david a. barriers between guidelines and improved patient care: an analysis of ahcpr'sunstable angina clinical practice guideline. health care research selected papers fromthe association for health services research annual meeting, june 21œ23, 1998. 1999apr; 34(1 part ii):377œ389.kohane, isaac s.; dong, hongmei, and szolovits, peter. health information identification and deidentification toolkit. proceedings of the american medical informatics association,symp. 1998; 356œ360.lo, bernard, and alpers, ann. uses and abuses of prescription drug information in pharmacybenefits management programs. jama. 2000 feb 9; 283(6):801œ806.lo, bernard. values in research: what are policyrelevant issues to study: how to do it ethically?presented at connecting ethics and health policy, bethesda, maryland, oct 1, 1999.references95protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lowrance, william w. privacy and health research: a report to the u.s. secretary of health andhuman services. 1997 may.malenka, d. j.; mcgarth, p. d.; wennberg, d. e.; ryan, t. j jr.; kellett, m. a. jr.; shubrooks, s. j.jr.; bradley, w. a.; hettelemen, b. d.; robb, j. f.; hearne, m. j.; silver, t. m.; watkins,m. w.; o'meara, j. r.; verlee, p. n., and o'rourke, d. j. the relationship betweenoperator volume and outcomes after percutaneous coronary interventions in high volumehospitals in 1994œ1996: the northern new england experience. northern new englandcardiovascular disease study group. journal of the american college of cardiology. 1999nov 1; 34(5):1471œ1480.mccarthy, douglas b.; shatin, deborah; drinkard, carol r.; kleinman, john h., and gardner,jacqueline s. medical records and privacy: empirical effects on legislation. hsr: healthservices research. 1999 apr; 34 (part ii)(1):417œ425.melton, l. joseph iii. the threat to medicalrecords research. the new england journal ofmedicine. 1997 nov 13; 337(20).norsigian, judy and billings, paul. privacy and medicalrecords research. the new englandjournal of medicine. 1998 apr 9; 338(15).norton, e. c.; garfinkel, s. a.; mcquay, l. j.; heck, d. a.; wright, jg.; dittus, r., and lubitz,r.m. the effect of hospital volume on the inhospital complication rate in knee replacementpatients. health services research. 1998 dec; 33(5 pt 1):1191œ1210.nrc (national research council). committee on maintaining privacy and security in health careapplications of the national infrastructure, computer science and telecommunicationsboard, commission on physical sciences, mathematics and applications, and nationalresearch council. for the record. protecting electronic health information. washington,dc: national academy press. 1997.nrc (national research council) panel of confidentiality and data access, george t. duncan,thomas b. jabine, and virginia a. de wolf, editors. private lives and public policiesconfidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. 1993.o'brien, dale g., and yasnoff, william a. privacy, confidentiality, and security in informationsystems of state health agencies. american journal of preventive medicine. 1999; 16(4):351œ358.oprr, national institute of health. intitutional review board (irb) guidebook, 1993 [web page].1993. available at: http://grants.nih.gov/grants/oprr/irb/irbguidebook.htm.phrma. phrma policy papers: twin goals: privacy and progress [web page]. available at: http://www.phrma.org/issues/goals.html.pritts, j.; goldman, j.; hudson, z.; berenson, a.; and hadley, e. the state of healthprivacy: anuneven terrainša comprehensive survey of state health privacy statutes. health privacyproject; institute for health care research and policy, georgetown university. 1999.available online at http://www.healthprivacy.org/resources/statereports/contents.htmlshalala, donna. confidentiality of individually identifiable health information, recommendations ofthe secretary of health and human services, pursuant to section 264 of the health insuranceportability and accountability act of 1996. 1997 sep 11.sollano, j. a.; gelijns, a. c.; moskowitz, a. j.; heitjan, d. f.; cullinane, s.; saha, t.; chen, j. m.;roohan, p. j.; reemstsma, k.; and shields, e. p. volumeoutcome relationships incardiovascular operations: new york state, 1990œ1995. journal of thoracic cardiovascularsurgery. 1999 mar; 117(3):419œ428.sweeney, latanya. weaving technology and policy together to maintain confidentiality. journalof law, medicine & ethics. 1997; 25:98œ110.references96protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ubel, pa; zell, mm; miller, dj; fischer, gs; petersstefani, d; and arnold, rm. elevator talk:observational study of inappropriate comments in a public space. american journal ofmedicine. 1995; 99:190œ194.wolf, leslie e. and lo, bernard. practicing safer research using the law to protect theconfidentiality of sensitive research data. irb: a review of human subjects research,1999; 21(5):4œ7woodward, beverly. challenges to human subject protections in us medical research. jama. 1999nov 24; 282(20):1947œ1965.zito, julie magno; safer, daniel j.; dosreis, susan; gardner, james f.; boles, myde, and lynch,frances. trends in the prescribing of psychotropic medications to preschoolers. jama.2000 feb 23; 283(8):1025œ1030.references97protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references98protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acronyms and abbreviationsaamcassociation of american medical collegesaceamerican college of epidemiologyahrqagency for healthcare research and qualityahsrassociation for health services researchaspeassistant secretary for planning and evaluationarenaapplied research ethics national associationaspeassistant secretary for planning and evaluationcfrcode of federal regulationsdhhsdepartment of health and human servicesdsldigital subscriber linefdafood and drug administrationgaogeneral accounting officeghppgeorgetown health privacy projecthipaahealth insurance portability and accountability acthivhuman immunodeficiency virushmohealth maintenance organizationhsrhealth services researchihcintermountain health careacronyms and abbreviations99protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiscihc information security committeeiominstitute of medicineirbinstitutional review boardispeinternational society for pharmacoepidemiologyitinformation technologyjhitajoint healthcare information technology alliancemcwirbmedical college of wisconsin irb discussion forummpamultiple project assurancenhisnational health interview surveynihnational institutes of healthnrcnational research counciloecdorganization for economic cooperation and developmentohrpoffice of human research protections (formerly oprr)oigoffice of inspector generalomboffice of management and budgetoprroffice for protection from research riskspbmpharmacy benefit managementphrmapharmaceutical research and manufacturers of americapkipublic key infrastructureprim&rpublic responsibility in medicine and researchqaquality assuranceqiquality improvementrtiresearch triangle instituteucsfuniversity of california at san franciscousuhsuniform services university of health sciencesuthscsauniversity of texas health sciences center in san antoniowirbwestern institutional review boardacronyms and abbreviations100protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix astudy activitiesas contracted with the sponsors, the agency for healthcare research andquality and the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation, theinstitute of medicine created a 12person committee that was charged withidentifying best practices of institutional review boards and private organizationsin the protection of privacy and maintenance of confidentiality in health servicesresearch. the committee included members with expertise in medical ethics,health services research, epidemiological research, clinical research, irbfunction, health and privacy law, statistics, computer science, and health database administration. the committee met by telephone conference call in january2000 and held a workshop in march 2000 (agenda follows). the workshop, whichwas open to the public, included presentations from irb administrators andchairs, research foundations, and health care services companies (seeappendix b). the workshop also featured presentations of the drafts of twocommissioned papers (see appendix c and appendix d). in addition to theworkshop, the committee posted an invitation on a list serve and on the nationalacademies' website to irbs to contribute information (invitation followsworkshop agenda).appendix a101protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.workshop on institutional review boardsinstitute of medicinececil and ida green building,rooms gr130 and gr1102001 wisconsin avenue, n.w.march 13œ14, 2000monday, march 13, 20008:30 a.m.call to order, welcome by chair bernard lo, m.d.charge to committee, introductions, procedures, and greetings fromsponsors9:15oprr overviewthomas puglisi, ph.d.9:30irb administratorsart anderson, m.d., fort detrick, u.s. armyangie khan, university of texas health science center, san antonio10:00discussion10:30break10:45irb chairs/or membersjames kahn, m.d., university of california at san franciscorobert amdur, m.d., university of floridasteve garfinkel, ph.d., research triangle institutetora bikson, ph.d., rand corporation11:45discussion12:30 p.m.lunch1:30private/or independent irbangela bowen, m.d., western institutional review board1:45discussion2:00pharmaceutical companyharry guess, ph.d., merck2:15discussionappendix a102protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2:30health services companiesfred teitelbaum, ph.d., and jennifer low, esq., express scriptsbrent james, m.d., and morris linton, j.d., intermountain health careandrew nelson, healthpartners3:15discussion3:30break3:45comparing privacy standards internationallybartha knoppers, j.d.4:15discussion5:30adjourntuesday, march 14 (gr 110)8:30 a.m.call to order, welcome by chair, brief introductions of committee9:00technical updatelawrence dietz, esq., axent technologies9:15discussion9:30special considerations regarding data on minorsross thompson, ph.d.10:00discussion10:15break10:30special considerations of privacy in heavily studied minoritypopulationswilliam freeman, m.d.10:45discussion11:00general discussion12:00 noonadjourn open sessionappendix a103protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.invitation to irbs to provide information onpractices of reviewing health servicesresearch*the institute of medicine (iom) is conducting a project on the role of irbsin the protection of data privacy in health services research. as part of thatproject, we are requesting general information from practitioners in the field withrespect to the issues identified below. we expect that this information requestwill be of interest to those who currently chair, serve on, or administer an irb,and whose committee at least occasionally receives protocols for research thatdepend on secondary data mining or linkage, in health services research orsimilar secondary analyses of healthrelated data.by ﬁhealth services researchﬂ we mean studies primarily using alreadycollected data to examine the impact of organization, financing, and managementof health care services on access to, or the delivery, cost, outcomes, or quality of,services. secondarily, we would include studies of already collected data thatassociate data sets to examine the outcomes of interventions, where similarprivacy issues may arise.under the statement of task for this project, the iom will gatherinformation on current practices and principles, and if possible, recommend a setof best practices, for use by irbs in safeguarding data privacy in health servicesresearch. the iom has appointed a committee and has scheduled a workshopintended to supply information to the committee with respect to these issues.interested persons are invited to provide information regarding the practicesof irbs in protecting data privacy in health services research. this is not intendedas a comprehensive survey, and we are not testing any specific hypothesis. pleasefeel free to elaborate on some or all of the issues identified below.unless you indicate otherwise on your response, your name and contactinformation will be made available only to iom staff, and will not be presented tothe study committee. the substance of your response (without your name andcontact information) will be provided to the iom study committee (with yourresponse identified only by general category such as hospital, university, etc.) andwill be included in a public access file created by the iom and made available tothe public upon request. by submitting a response, you give permission to theiom to quote or use all or part of your submission (without specific identificationof you) in our final report or other works of the institution, which may be postedon the world wide web or translated into other languages.if you would like to provide information, please send it to the contact pointsbelow. please also feel free, as always, to contact the responsible iom staffofficer listed below if you wish to discuss any aspect of the project.*posted on mcwirb list serve and national academies current projects systemwebsite.appendix a104protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.discussion issues1. policy or practices, if any, for identifying specific studies as healthservices research.2. procedures, if any, for determining which health services research studiesare exempt from irb review.3. procedures, if any, to determine whether and which information isidentifiable when assessing risk of disclosure in an health servicesresearch protocol.4. procedures, if any, for weighing the importance of the research relative tothe risk (of disclosure) to those whose data are used.5. procedures, if any, in place for merging different datasets, and in thatcontext, for assuring that identifiable health information is protected6. procedures, if any, used for reviewing protocols to assure that identifiablehealth information is being protected while the study is actuallyunderway.7. procedures, if any, to review protocols for the protection of data after astudy is completed.8. procedures, if any, for auditing or oversight to make sure protections andprocedures are used and enforced.9. provisions, procedures and/or principles that should be more widelyadopted by irbs in safeguarding data privacy in health services research.thank you.lee l. zwanziger, ph.d.senior program officerinstitute of medicineappendix a105protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix binstitutional review boards and healthservices research data privacy: aworkshop summaryexecutive summarythe institute of medicine (iom) and the committee on the role ofinstitutional review boards in health services research data privacy protectionhosted a workshop on march 13œ14, 2000, to gather and to exchange informationon the protection of human subjects in health services research (hsr). hsrexamines the impact of the organization, financing and management, of healthcare services, on the access to, delivery, cost, outcomes and quantity of thoseservices. the benefits of such studies include increased understanding of theeffects of changing parts of the health care system, such as whether a change inthe reimbursement policy for a particular class of drug has any effect on thehealth or quality of life of the participants. the major risk in such research is notphysical harm, but risk resulting from improper disclosure of personalinformation, that is, a breach of confidentiality. confidentiality can be protectedby limiting access to data and strengthening protections of data handling.however, hsr can be conducted only if researchers have access to data. thus,data privacy and data access are objectives that have to be balanced.policy contextin recent years, public interest in and concern about the privacy of personallyidentifiable health information has increased. currently, there is nocomprehensive federal law that affords protection for the privacy of all healthrelated information. there are some federal laws, and state statutes varying bylocale,this appendix was released as a separate workshop summary in june 2000.appendix b106protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that protect certain types of personally identifiable health information undercertain circumstances (gostin et al., 1996; o'brian and yasnoff, 1999; goldmanand hudson, 1999).in 1996, congress enacted the health insurance portability andaccountability act (hipaa), which directed the secretary of health and humanservices to publish regulations by february 2000, unless the congress had takenlegislative action at least six months earlier. the secretary published a notice ofproposed rulemaking in november 1999 (department of health and humanservices, 1999), with the comment period closing on february 17, 2000. as thisworkshop was being held and summarized, the department was analyzing andresponding to the many (approximately 52,000) comments that the proposed ruleelicited.historically, the focus of institutional review boards (irbs) has been onprotecting human subjects from harm associated with invasive clinical proceduresor administration of new drugs. in hsr there are few physical risks. much hsrinvolves the analysis of previously collected, personally identifiable, healthinformation recorded in the course of clinical care, billing, or payment forservices. thus, in hsr the primary risks are due to breaches of confidentiality,with ensuing loss of privacy and possible stigma and discrimination. little isknown about irb practices in the area of hsr projects. furthermore, much hsrusing large databases falls outside the scope of federal regulations that requireoversight by irbs because it is undertaken with private funding by organizationsthat do not hold federal multiproject assurances that require all research at theinstitution to fall under irb review.scope of projectin order to facilitate the national discussion of the topic of irb oversight ofhsr, the sponsors commissioned the iom to call together a panel of nationalexperts on various aspects of the problem. the purpose of this project was toprovide information and advice on the current and best practices of irbs inprotecting privacy in health services research. the project was sponsored by theagency for healthcare research and quality and the office of the assistantsecretary for planning and evaluation, both in the department of health andhuman services. the charge to the committee was as follows:1. to gather information on the current practices and principles followed byinstitutional review boards to safeguard the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information used for health services research purposes,in particular, to identify those irb practices that are superior in protectingthe privacy, confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable healthinformation.2. to gather information on the current practices and principles employed inprivately funded health services research studies (that are generally notsubject to irb approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personallyidentifiableappendix b107protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health information, and to consider whether and how irb best practices inthis regard might be applied to such privately sponsored studies.3. if appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding theconfidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might bevoluntarily applied to health services research projects by irbs andprivate sponsors.this summary describes the presentations and discussions that took place atthe iom workshop on the role of institutional review boards and healthservices research data privacy. this summary reflects what transpired at theworkshop and does not include committee deliberations, findings, or conclusions.the committee's deliberative report is being published separately (iom, 2000).workshopthe workshop itself was one of the major informationgathering activities ofthe committee. the committee invited speakers including irb administrators andchairs from universities, research foundations, the u.s. army and privatebusinesses, as well as representatives from health care services andpharmaceutical companies. the committee also welcomed all interested parties toattend and to participate in discussion periods following the presentations. theinvited speakers and members of the audience were asked to provide informationon what their organizations actually do to protect confidentiality in healthservices research, whether or not the research they do falls under the purview ofthe common rule. the committee also asked the participants to share anyobservations they had made regarding which practices are best and which mightbe applicable to other institutions.the office for protection from research risks (oprr) is the agency thatadministers the federal regulations on human and animal subjects. the director ofoprr's division on human subject protections presented an overview of federalregulations on human subjects, particularly regulations pertaining to thedetermination of whether a records review study involves human subjects, whendata are considered identifiable, whether a study might be exempted from irbreview, and whether informed consent from subjects might be waived.the committee heard presentations by several speakers who administer orchair irbs in universities, private foundations, corporations, or military settings.highlights mentioned included how irbs have wrestled with determiningwhether data would be identifiable and how to ensure that potential risks to allaffected parties are considered. for instance, the set of subjects may include notonly the patients who received a service, but also the health care providers whodelivered the service. in most hsr studies, the subjects themselves are not likelyto receive any direct benefit, so the tolerance of some irbs for risk to thesubjects is correspondingly low, although irbs consider risk to subjects inbalance with the benefits to society of the research in the case of hsr as with anyprotocol. other highlights follow.appendix b108protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an irb chair from the ucsf medical school reported on an internal studyleading to a recommendation that research grants should include 1.0 to 1.5percent of the budget as an abovetheline item directed to the support of theinstitution's human subjects protection program.a former irb chair, recently relocated to university of florida, identifiedthe differentiation of health services research and health services operations ascritical, but also noted that the evaluation of risks to privacy is not new for irbsand that current federal regulations allow appropriate flexibility.an irb chair from rand described its online system for initiating researchprojects, designed to help investigators determine whether the project might beaddressed as research and, if so, to explore the possibilities of exemption fromfull irb review, eligibility for expedited review, or requirement for full review.this irb has access to a threeperson privacy team, including an informationresource specialist, a data librarian, and a networks specialist, to help design andimplement data safeguarding plans commensurate with the level of risk forvarious protocols.an irb chair from the research triangle institute observed that it is veryimportant that health services researchers have the freedom to work with theirirbs to modify standard consent and confidentiality language as appropriate forthe particular study in question. he concluded that although many issues are oftennot well understood by irb members or by researchers because they representnew or rare situations, the irb system is workable and working, and has never inhis experience been an onerous burden to researchers.an officer from intermountain health care described the comprehensivetechnical protections and enforceable policies the organization has implementedin the protection of personally identifiable health information, whether in thecontext of research or in day to day operations of providing health services. henoted that all known violations of privacy have occurred in operations, but nonehave been found in the research branch.a representative of axent, an information security firm, spoke on recentmarket trends in security such as the widespread adoption of web access securityproducts and virtual private networks, the slower adoption of products forauthenticating users (i.e., public key infrastructure products), public keyinfrastructure products, and the general tendency of organizations to contract forinformation technologists rather than develop inhouse expertise.the chair of the irb of the indian health service spoke about ethical issuesregarding research with minority groups, including both the privacy ofindividuals within small and isolated groups and the privacy of the group itself. ineither case, he observed, consultation with individuals familiar with theparticulars of the group is important to avoid unintentional privacy violations andto build trust between the researchers and the participants.the committee had commissioned two background papers, in accord withthe contract between the iom and the sponsors, which were presented in draft atthe workshop. one paper analyzed issues regarding hsr with children. theappendix b109protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.author identified three issues of particular concern in considering health servicesresearch involving minors, including the heterogeneity of the population inquestion, complications arising from proxy consent, and the changing interestsand risks affecting the subjects as they grow older. the second commissionedpaper analyzed international standards regarding the use of personally identifiablehealth information for hsr. the author studied international conventions andguidelines and the domestic law of several nation states. this analysis pointedout different approaches to requiring oversight of the use of personallyidentifiable health information in hsr by irblike bodies and the uses of suchinformation without individual consent. both papers are appended to thecommittee's report, as is this workshop summary.appendix b110protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1 introductionthe institute of medicine and the committee on the role of institutionalreview boards in health services research data privacy protection hosted aworkshop on march 13œ14, 2000, to gather and to exchange information onhuman subjects protection in health services research.health services research uses quantitative or qualitative methodology toexamine the impact of the organization, financing, and management of healthcare services on the access to and the delivery, cost, outcomes, and quality ofservices. another iom committee (iom, 1995) recently developed the followingdefinition:health services research is a multidisciplinary field of inquiry, both basic andapplied, that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery,organization, financing, and outcomes of health care services to increaseknowledge and understanding of the structure, processes, and effects of healthservices for individuals and populations.as these definitions show, hsr includes a broad range of questions and ofresearch methodologies. this iom project concentrates on hsr conductedthrough analyses of previously existing databases of health information. further,among such studies, this project considers just the role of institutional reviewboards in ensuring that the study design will maintain confidentiality in the use ofthe subjects' data.the benefits of hsr studies include increased understanding of the resultsof policy changes and other systemic effects in health care. the major risk in thisbranch of research, where the actual object of study is not the human body,appendix b111protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.but data about human beings, is likewise not to life and limb, but rather the riskresulting from improper disclosure of personal information. any potential forharm would come about through possible breaches of confidentiality. themethodology, and in many respects the type of questions, of hsr are often verysimilar to the questions and methods directed toward assessing and improving thequality of operations within an organization. as a result, a boundary betweenresearch and operations is often difficult to locate.it is important to distinguish privacy and confidentiality. the followingexplanation is provided by the office of protection from research risks inguidance to institutional review boards.privacy can be defined in terms of having control over the extent, timing, andcircumstances of sharing oneself (physically, behaviorally, or intellectually) withothers. confidentiality pertains to the treatment of information that an individualhas disclosed in a relationship of trust and with the expectation that it will not bedivulged to others in ways that are inconsistent with the understanding of theoriginal disclosure without permission. (oprr guidebook, chapter three,section d, 1993)the protection of privacy is an important matter, and many individualsregard the protection of their privacy (and likewise the confidential treatment ofprivate information they choose to disclose) as an important ethical value. theresponsible conduct of highquality research is also an important value, and manyindividuals appreciate the benefits of effective health care, efficacy that is basedon information that can be obtained only from population data. privacy andconfidentiality can be protected by limiting access to data. good research can beconducted only if investigators have access to data. risks to individuals (frompossible breaches of confidentiality) and benefits both to individuals and society(from the results of good research) are thus two concerns that we must balance.in research, one way to ensure that subjects are protected, and in particularfor this report's concerns, that the confidentiality of personally identifiable healthinformation is maintained, is to have the proposed study reviewed by aninstitutional review board (irb). irbs are usually located within the organizationdoing the research, so that they can be aware of the nuances of the local situation.irbs must ensure that they follow federal regulations pertaining to the protectionof human subjects but they also use their local knowledge in practice along withthe general principles in those regulations. this is why it was important in thisproject to consider the practices that irbs actually follow as well as theregulations they apply through those practices.it is also important to understand that irb review is required only forresearch activities. so if data were to be collected for some proposed research(i.e., federally funded or otherwise subject to federal regulation), the protocolwould be reviewed by an irb for the protection of confidentiality. but healthcare provider or product companies often undertake reviews of their internaloperations to assess and improve the quality of care and/or products theyprovide. theseappendix b112protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.quality assessment and quality improvement exercises are not defined as researchbut may involve similar types of data collection as hsr, as well as raising similarquestions about the use of private information and the maintenance ofconfidentiality. so if similar data were to be collected or used by a health careprovider or health product company in the course of daytoday clinical care orbusiness operations, such collection and use would not be subject to regulationsrequiring irb review.background and policy contextin recent years, public interest in and concern about privacy and personallyidentifiable health information has increased and continues (e.g., appelbaum,2000). some individuals have been disturbed, for instance, at corporate use ofhealth information to create targeted mailings that seem to straddle the linebetween anticipating health questions and marketing products. for example, adatabase marketing firm received patient prescription records from two largepharmacies in the washington, d.c. metro area (lo and alpers, 2000). the firmthen created mailings for the pharmacies on the pharmacies' letterhead targeted toconsumers of certain prescription drug products, informing them of new productswith similar indications. the project, which was quickly canceled by thepharmacies in response to customer complaints, had been sponsored by themanufacturers of the new products, although the manufacturers never had accessto any patient records themselves. in other cases, these worries have beenheightened by still more dramatic reports of privacy violations, such as therelease of hiv test results of hundreds of individuals to several floridanewspapers (in etzioni, 1999). such incidents are not hsr, but still increasegeneral concern about the reliability of privacy protections.in 1996, congress enacted the health insurance portability andaccountability act directing the secretary of health and human services toprepare detailed recommendations on standards for privacy and personallyidentifiable health information. the secretary's recommendations were deliveredto congress in september 1997 (shalala, 1997), and several privacy bills havebeen introduced in congress since that time. both the secretary'srecommendations and most of the privacy bills introduced in the 105th congresswould permit personally identifiable health information to be used in researchwithout the person's explicit permission if the research project were approved byan irb.the hipaa further directed the secretary of health and human services topublish regulations on privacy standards by february 2000, unless the congresshad taken legislative action at least six months earlier. the secretary published anotice of proposed rulemaking in november 1999, with the comment periodclosing on february 17, 2000 (department of health and human services, 1999).the proposed regulations would create new requirements for privacy protectionfor all health care providers and health plans, and would establish researchstandards and oversight for all research. in addition, the proposed rule wouldpermit the use and disclosure of personally identifiable health information forresearchappendix b113protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.without authorization by the subject, as long as the research protocol had beenapproved by an irb or, if it does not fall under regulations requiring irb review,then by an equivalent body. as this workshop was being held and summarized,the department was analyzing and responding to the many (approximately52,000) comments that the proposed rule elicited.another important context for this report is recent media attention toresearch on human subjects. for example, news stories on topics such as genetherapy and clinical trials in developing countries have highlighted concernsabout human subjects protections. policies on many levels, from institutional tointernational, address of the proper and ethical conduct of research with humansubjects. in the united states, the use of human beings as research subjects isgoverned by federal regulations when the research is federally funded. the bodyof federal regulations about human subjects protection (45 cfr 46 subpart a) iscalled the common rule, since it has been adopted ﬁin commonﬂ by manyfederal departments and agencies that are involved in research with humansubjects as the basis for their regulations. the food and drug administration(fda) has adopted similar regulations (21 cfr 50 and 56) and will not considerclinical trial results submitted in support of a marketing application unless thetrial was approved by an irb. in addition, many organizations that do humansubjects research have entered into agreements to conduct all their researchaccording to the common rule, regardless of funding. such agreements arecalled multiple product assurances (mpas, see also footnote 6 below).the provisions of this shared body of regulation, including the commonrule and mpas as well as fda regulations, grew from a variety of sourcesincluding the belmont report (belmont, 1979). the belmont report presentedthe ethical basis of human subjects research as three principles: respect forpersons, beneficence, and justice. the main mechanism in the human subjectsprotection system for protecting research subjects and for assessing the balancebetween the risks and benefits of research is the institutional review board. anirb is a standing committee composed of scientists and/or physicians not directlyinvolved with the proposal being reviewed and including at least one person whois not primarily involved in scientific pursuits and at least one person who is nototherwise connected with the institution. irbs review proposals for research withhuman participants to make sure that any risk of harm to the subjects of theresearch is reasonable in relation to the possible benefits and that they will berespected as persons, not just used as research subjects. in many studies thesubjects participate only after giving informed consent. so the irb must makesure that subjects will be fully informed and then have an opportunity to consent,decline to participate in the research, or withdraw at anytime, unless the researchis of such low risk that informed consent is not needed. in federal regulations, theirb of a particular organization is charged with reviewing and approving allresearch at the institution covered by the regulations. the criteria set out in theregulations for irbs to use in assessing research proposals are listed in box 11.appendix b114protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.++'˙6+ˇˇ+':6';6%'=6'<6'>6˘˘ˇsource: 45 cfr 46, subpart a 46.111.research using databases containing health information on individuals, ofwhich health services research is one example, also falls under the commonrule, although the belmont report and regulations primarily address clinicalappendix b115protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research and individual direct interventions. hsr involving the analysis ofpreviously collected data is somewhat different from clinical research in thatsubjects participate indirectly because researchers are sorting data on large sets ofindividuals but not intervening with the specific individuals themselves. as aresult, the application of the principles may also have to be somewhat different inhsr.project objectivesthe sponsors commissioned the iom to call together a panel of nationalexperts on various aspects of the problem. the purpose of this project was toprovide information and advice on the current and best practices of irbs inprotecting confidentiality in health services research. the project was sponsoredby the agency for healthcare research and quality and the office of theassistant secretary for planning and evaluation, both in the department ofhealth and human services.the charge to the committee was as follows:1. to gather information on the current practices and principles followed byinstitutional review boards to safeguard the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information used for health services research purposes,in particular, to identify those irb practices that are superior in protectingthe privacy, confidentiality, and security of personally identifiable healthinformation.2. to gather information on the current practices and principles employed inprivately funded health services research studies (that are generally notsubject to irb approval) to safeguard the confidentiality of personallyidentifiable health information, and to consider whether and how irbbest practices in this regard might be applied to such privately sponsoredstudies.3. if appropriate, to recommend a set of best practices for safeguarding theconfidentiality of personally identifiable health information that might bevoluntarily applied to health services research projects by irbs andprivate sponsors.the charge did not encompass many other possible questions about privacyof medical records or electronic records in general. the committee recognized thestrong connections between these related matters and the question of protectingdata confidentiality in health services research. however, in keeping with thecommittee's charge, these issues were not discussed at the workshop. thecommittee also did not discuss issues of privacy and confidentiality as theypertain to other types of research, for example, clinical research that deals withsensitive topics such as hiv infection, mental illness, or substance abuse.the committee focused its attention on hsr involving the secondaryanalysis of existing data because this type of research raises the most dilemmasabout how irbs can protect the confidentiality of the patients' data. to be sure,hsr that involves, for example, questionnaires to patients about satisfaction orclinical outcomes also raises concerns about privacy and confidentiality.appendix b116however, patients must be contacted and must cooperate for data to be gathered.becauseprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of these interactions, the research may be less likely to be exempt from irbreview, and potential subjects have the ability to decline to participate.the committee therefore urges the reader to bear in mind that such relatedmatters were not in the charge, were not addressed by the committee, and inparticular, were not discussed at the workshop.scope of workshop reportthis summary describes the presentations and discussions that took place atthe march 13œ14, 2000 iom workshop on institutional review boards andhealth services research data privacy protection. this summary reflects whattranspired at the workshop and does not include committee deliberations, findingsor conclusions. the committee's deliberative report is being published separately(iom, 2000).the workshop itself was one of the major informationgathering activities ofthe committee. the committee invited speakers including irb administrators andchairs from universities, research foundations, the u.s. army, and privatebusinesses, as well as representatives from health care services andpharmaceutical companies (see appended workshop agenda). the committee alsowelcomed all interested parties to attend and to participate in discussion periodsfollowing the presentations. the invited speakers and the audience were asked toprovide information on what their organizations, whether irbs or organizationsdoing research not under the purview of the common rule, currently and actuallydo to protect privacy in health services research. the committee also asked theparticipants to share any observations they had made regarding which practicesare best and might be applicable to other institutions.some of the issues discussed at the workshop and in this document havebeen the subject of recent iom and national research council (nrc) reports.these reports include for the record (nrc, 1997), health data in theinformation age (iom, 1994), and private lives and public policies (nrc,1993).definitionsthis summary uses several terms repeatedly, for which the committee hasoffered definitions below.* in most cases, these definitions are incomplete in aglobal sense, reflecting their use in the context of the present study; ﬁprivacy,ﬂfor instance, has other shades of meaning to be sure, but the definition belowemphasizes the use of the word in regard to information.informational privacyšthe right of individuals to control access to, and theuse of, information about themselves.*bradburn, n., 2000; buckovich et al., 1999; nrc, 1997; lowrance, 1997; iom, 1995;oprr, 1993.appendix b117protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.confidentialša manner of treating private information, which has beendisclosed by the individual subject of the information to a particular person orpersons, such that further disclosure of the information will not be allowed tooccur without authorization.health services researchša multidisciplinary field of inquiry, both basicand applied, that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery,organization, financing, and outcomes of health care services to increaseknowledge and understanding of the structure, processes, and effects of healthservices for individuals and populations.personally identifiable health informationšinformation such that anindividual person can be identified as the subject.institutional review boardšadministrative body established to protect therights and welfare of human research subjects in research activities of theinstitution to which the board is affiliated, by reviewing proposed researchprotocols and approving or requesting changes prior to their inception.appendix b118protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 workshop summarythe committee on the role of institutional review boards in healthservices research data privacy protection hosted a public workshop on march13œ14, 2000 (agenda appended). the committee invited speakers with a varietyof institutional perspectives and also welcomed contributions from the audience.as a starting point for the workshop, the committee reviewed its charge (as givenin the previous section). the committee was charged with collecting informationon the current practices of institutional review boards for protecting data privacyin health services research, gathering information on the practices oforganizations that are not required to consult irbs but still carry out hsractivities where data privacy and confidentiality are of concern, and to the extentpossible, identifying and recommending the best practices for wider adoption.this section presents a summary of the workshop proceedings. the summarydoes not include deliberations, findings, or recommendations by the committee(see iom, 2000)introductory presentationsthe first series of presentations was given by representatives of severalagencies within the federal department of health and human services (dhhs).the sponsors of the project, the agency for healthcare research and quality(ahrq) and the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation(aspe), outlined their perspective on the objectives of the workshop and thecommittee's task, and the office for protection from research risks (oprr)appendix b119protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.provided an overview of the current regulations on the protection of humansubjects in research.comments from sponsoring agenciesdr. michael fitzmaurice of the ahrq, one of the agencies sponsoring theproject, spoke first. dr. fitzmaurice observed that the tension between theavailability of data for research and the protection of data for maintainingconfidentiality and privacy will not disappear but has to be managed throughjudicious balancing of these countervailing interests. essentially, these interestsshould reinforce each other. in order to facilitate the national discussion of thisbalancing with regard to the use of individually identifiable health data by healthservices researchers with principles and best practices for maintainingconfidentiality, the sponsors commissioned the institute of medicine (iom) toconvene a panel of national experts on various aspects of the problem. thepanel's report will provide guidance to assist irbs that review hsr,organizations that are not required to use irbs but may still be concerned withbalancing privacy and data access in such research, and health servicesresearchers themselves.dr. fitzmaurice continued that the dhhs is directed under the healthinsurance portability and accountability act to promulgate federal regulationsgoverning the privacy of personal health information. the proposed regulationsallow the release of individually identifiable health data and information for usein research, under appropriate conditions. current and proposed regulationswould set conditions for safeguards that researchers must observe. oversightmechanisms described in the proposed federal regulations on health privacy(department of health and human services, 1999) depend on the current irbsystem but also would require complementary oversight bodies, called ﬁprivacyboardsﬂ(see box 21); that would oversee the protection of personal healthinformation in research not covered (by regulation or voluntarily) by the currentirb systemšnonfederally funded research for the most part.mr. john fanning of the aspe (also a sponsor of the project) providedfurther context for the workshop. mr. fanning pointed out that many sets ofprinciples pertaining to privacy protection have already been published, but theseprinciples may fail to provide practical guidance to investigators and irbsconcerned with hsr.1 in addition, he noted, little information is availableregarding actual practices and procedures whereby the principles are implementedby irbs. such information is needed in order for irbs to improve their oversightof hsr. in particular, mr. fanning explained, the agencies sponsoring the project1because different groups are developing principles to address different problems, or atleast to address problems in different contexts, the sets of principles do not directly overlapin many instancesšin particular, not mentioning a principle is not evidence that anorganization would oppose it. these different perspectives make for difficult comparison(though see buckovich, 1999). see, for example, ghpp, 1999; ispe, 1997; lowrance,1997; aamc, 1997; jhita (web page), phrma (web page).appendix b120protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.˚"#$˚((((((˚((˚((˚((((((source: dhhs, 1999.believe that identification of best practices of irbs in reviewing hsr couldprovide helpful guidance to other irbs, as well as to organizations that are notrequired to have irbs review health services research but wish to ensure thatconfidentiality and privacy are adequately protected in hsr.the location of the boundaries of hsr, in the focus of the present project,has been an additional and difficult question. the regulations now in place defineﬁresearchﬂ as an activity intended to result in generalizable knowledge. however,it is often difficult to draw a line between hsr and other activities that usepersonal health information in databases, such as internal efforts at qualityassurance, business planning, or marketing.in the discussion immediately following the presentations, committeemembers highlighted their concerns about focusing on the protection of privacy inthe context of research while ignoring very similar activities using databases thatappendix b121protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contain personal health information when undertaken for business oradministrative purposes. the sponsors' representatives replied that the commonrule applies only to the oversight of research, not to these other activities. thus,although the appropriate use of personal health information for purposes otherthan research is an important question that the nation has to address, the currentproject is intended to address only the more limited but still important topic ofhsr.overview of current human subjects regulationsthe oprr administers the federal regulations on human and animalsubjects. dr. thomas puglisi, director of oprr's division of human subjectprotections, presented an overview of the human subjects regulations to thecommittee. irbs have to address several questions, all of which may requiresome interpretation specific to hsr. first, does an activity constitute research?second, is the project exempt from irb review? third, may individual informedconsent be waived?dr. puglisi explained that the regulations apply to projects involving humansubjects, defined as protocols in which there is to be an intervention or interactionwith a living person that would not be occurring, or would be occurring in someother fashion, but for the research or if identifiable private data or informationwill be obtained for the protocol in a form associable with the individual(figure 21). private information, in this context, is defined as ﬁinformationabout behavior that occurs in a context in which an individual can reasonablyexpect that no observation or recording is taking place, and information whichhas been provided for specific purposes by an individual and which theindividual can reasonably expect will not be made public (e.g. a medicalrecord)ﬂ (45 cfr 46 102(f)). the definition stipulates that the information mustbe individually identifiable, that is, that the identity of the individual can bereadily ascertained or associated with the information.dr. puglisi noted that several aspects of these regulations already meritattention with regard to hsr. with hsr, the second condition marking anactivity as research is generally the most pertinent (ﬁidentifiable private data orinformation will be obtained for the protocol in a form associable with theindividualﬂ), since hsr often works with data that have already been collectedand hence requires no further interaction with subjects. the question ofidentifiability can be difficult, since coded data are not necessarily nonidentifiablebecause subjects often still can be identified by inference.the term research is also defined in the regulations: the activity must besystematic and designed to contribute to generalizable knowledge. the importantterm ﬁgeneralizableﬂ is not, he pointed out, itself defined in the regulation. thisterm usually must mean at least that the product of the activity is intended to beapplicable beyond the immediate situation and present conditions. for example, aproject that is intended for publication in a medical journal or presentation at aconference would be deemed research, whereas an organization's internal reviewof records for the purpose of improving its operations would likely not beconsideredappendix b122protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 21 is the definition of ﬁhuman subjectﬂ at 45 cfr 46.102(f) metin the research activity?research. different organizations, however, make different distinctionsbetween research and quality assurance activities.activities may be exempt from irb review, either because they are notresearch or because they may not meet the definition of human subjects researchas described above. these conditions are a basis of a specific exemption (45cfr46.101(b)(4)):(4) research involving the collection or study of existing data, documents,records, pathological specimens, or diagnostic specimens, if these sources arepublicly available or if the information is recorded by the investigator in such amanner that subjects cannot be identified, directly or through identifiers linked tothe subjects.for a project that is research involving human subjects and is not eligible forexemption as above, the irb must ensure that the subjects have given free andinformed consent to participate, unless the informed consent requirementappendix b123protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.can be waived. the requirement for informed consent may be waived by the irbunder some conditions including that the research involves no more than minimalrisk and the research could not otherwise be practicably carried out (where ﬁnotpracticableﬂ is not specifically defined but means a general zone between merelyinconvenient and truly impossible). the key point in considering when a waiverof informed consent would be appropriate is ﬁminimal risk.ﬂ in hsr, dr. puglisiexplained, the irb would have to consider the protections for confidentiality thatwere built into the protocol, keeping in mind that the protocol may require accessto records on very large numbers of individuals, and weigh the probabilities ofharm or wrong to these individuals. with adequate protections, the irb oftendetermines that the risk would be minimal and individual informed consenttherefore unnecessary.in discussion following the presentation, several committee members raisedthe question of review of a protocol's expected benefit to society and its scientificmerit, with regard to which matter different irbs take different views. thequestion of the role of oprr in education also surfaced, in particular its possibleinvolvement in collecting and disseminating information about the best practicesof irbs. dr. puglisi said that a great deal of information and guidance is postedon oprr's website and that oprr is actively expanding its educationalactivities.irb functionmany different types of institutions conduct research with human subjectsand therefore have irbs associated with them, including universities, state andfederal agencies, hospitals, and research foundations. the committee invitedspeakers from a variety of these institutions to present information on thepractices and experience with protecting the confidentiality of data in healthservices research in their respective organizations.in preparation for the workshop, the speakers were given a list of points todiscuss points about irbs and hsr, which are listed in box 22.2 manypresenters used these discussion points as a basis for their remarks. the summaryof the presentations and discussion below follows these points as much aspossible. some discussion points, however, did not apply to some speakers, andseveral speakers remarked that they did not wish to repeat what had already beensaid about irb function, so they did not specifically speak to all the discussionissues in their presentations.2this list of suggested discussion issues was also posted on an irbtargeted list serveand on the projects' section of the national academies' current project system website,with an invitation to provide any relevant information or experience. the full invitation isincluded in appendix a of iom (2000).appendix b124protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved."#$˚˚source: iom 2000, appendix a.irb administratorsthe first speakers were irb administrators. irb administrators coordinateirb activities and provide staff support for irb meetings and actions. irbadministrators typically work very closely with their irbs in substantive as wellas procedural capacities, often serving as voting members and in some cases evenchairing the board.the first presenter was s. angela khan, institutional coordinator ofresearch review of the irb at the university of texas health sciences center insan antonio (uthscsa). the second presenter was colonel arthur anderson,m.d., administrator and also chair of the irb for the u.s. army medicalresearch institute of infectious diseases at fort detrick. col. andersonhighlighted some of the special features of human subjects research in themilitary. the summary of their remarks follows, with some modifications, theissues listed in box 22.identifying specific studies as hsrms. khan explained that the uthscsa irb does not specifically classifyprotocols as to whether they are hsr, but in any case does not review suchprojectsappendix b125protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.any differently than other protocols. this irb has reviewed protocols addressingvarious hsr questions including the effects of training and of guidelines, thedelivery and perception of services, and the costs of different services.col. anderson explained that his institute is a research institute that is notprimarily involved with providing health care to persons with illnesses. theinstitute does very little that would be classed as hsr but is heavily involved invaccine research studies, which give rise to many concerns about privacyprotections for the soldiers who volunteer.determining which hsr studies qualify as exemptms. khan reported that in assessing whether certain studies (generally onlythose directed toward internal quality assurance [qa]) should be exempt fromreview, the irb would consider whether the findings of the study will be disseminated beyond thedepartment proposing to carry out the study, whether the protocol includes any change in clinical care or clinicalprocesses, whether the data to be collected would be available to the investigator onlythrough the study (i.e., the investigator would not have access to such data innormal practice), and finally there is any risk to patients or staff.if the answer to all these questions is no, then the protocol could beconsidered exempt as a qa activity. other research may fall into an exemptcategory under the regulations but probably also would be reviewed at least by asubcommittee of the irb, and informed consent might still be required. ms.khan also noted that generally the first consideration about publication issufficient to classify a project as research since most investigators do in fact wishto publish their findings, even from projects that were planned as internalinvestigations, if they should prove interesting.ms. khan explained that other research that falls into one of the categoriesdefined in the regulations as exempt undergoes the review by irb members whoreview protocols in the ﬁexpeditedﬂ category.3 even for exempt studies, the irbopens files, requires annual reports, and for studies involving contacts withsubjects (e.g., interviews), often requires researchers to obtain informed consentor to provide subjects with written material including the elements that wouldappear on a consent form.3in the context of hsr, the most relevant exempt category is ﬁresearch, involving thecollection or study of existing data, documents, records, pathological specimens, ordiagnostic specimens, if these sources are publicly available or if the information isrecorded by the investigator in such a manner that subjects cannot be identified, directly orthrough identifiers linked to the subjectsﬂ (45 cfr 46.101(b)(4)).appendix b126protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.col. anderson explained that army regulations are separate from civilianregulations, but that the army's regulations on human subjects research closelyfollow the common rule as previously presented by dr. puglisi. he explainedfurther that the army's regulations on the treatment of military research subjectshave been expanded (by title 10 usc 980) to include a ban on waiving informedconsent when data collected will include identifying information, unless theresearch is exempt. finally, he said that the military criteria for exemption aresubstantively the same as the civilian criteria as codified in the common rule.determining whether information is identifiable in assessing risk ofdisclosurems. khan noted that the uthscsa irb continues to wrestle with how todetermine whether data would be identifiable. for projects collecting data fromcomputer databases, it asks the investigator to list all the fields to be collected andto indicate who will actually collect the data, how respect for privacy by anypersonnel involved will be ensured, and how further dissemination of theinformation will be prevented (e.g., storing data on computers that are notnetworked, storing codes identifying individuals separately from data, usingpasswords and/or key requirements to restrict access both to computers for datastorage and to computer housing identifying codes).col. anderson explained that the army tracks all the records associated witha soldier by social security number. in the case of certain types of research suchas developing vaccines in preparation for missions to other climates or protectionof soldiers from possible biological warfare, the military has adopted specialprecautions for maintaining confidentiality of the records. although many of thepersonal privacy issues of civilian life cannot enter into the military environment(i.e., a soldier's health status must be known to his or her supervisors, and he orshe cannot deny them access to it because it determines medical qualification toserve), additional privacy protection has been adopted for soldiers who volunteeras the subjects of biological warfare vaccine research. these additional protectionmeasures were adopted because information about the particular vaccines testedmight later be used as a basis for the denial of insurance coverage or otherbenefits or might be used to refuse issuing a visa in cases where the vaccinerecord suggested an assignment in a nation unfriendly to the united states. col.anderson noted that the use of vaccines, whose names are the same as those ofhighly hazardous organisms associated with biological warfare, does not have anyreal risks greater than those of ordinary vaccines used for the general public, butthe names may be frightening. to shield their privacy, soldiers may opt forseparate research medical records, stored apart from regular clinical records, sothat records regarding research participation remain confidential and under morerestricted access.appendix b127protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.weighing importance of the research relative to riskms. khan explained that risk to subjects must be balanced against benefitsof the research in hsr, as with any protocol. however, in most of the hsrstudies, she continued, the subjects themselves are not likely to receive any directbenefit. thus, the uthscsa irb's tolerance for risk to the subjects tends to becorrespondingly low. the irb tries to assist investigators in identifying possibledisclosure risks, stemming, for instance, from overlooked links between fields orretention of identifying information that could be eliminated without jeopardizingthe results of the research. ms. khan observed that investigators sometimes retainidentifying fields as a matter of convenience and sometimes even do so whenthere is no need for the information. the irb can assist by alerting investigatorsto the possible risks and educating them about how to avoid them.in the review of the privacy issues in an hsr study, ms. khan noted that theuthscsa irb considers all those about whom data would be collected, andwhose privacy might therefore be at risk. in some protocols, for instance, the setof subjects regarding whom data will be collected includes not only the patientswho received a service, but also the health care providers who delivered theservice. in this case, the uthscsa irb is concerned that the privacy of healthcare providers is protected.ensuring that identifiable information is protected during the studyms. khan explained that the uthscsa irb requires information at thetime of the application detailing how the protocol will protect confidentiality.upon approval, the irb instructs the investigators that they may not make anychanges to these procedures without prior irb approval. the irb requires statusreports annually or more often. ms. khan also noted that for any protocolinvolving particularly sensitive data, the irb requires the investigator to obtain acertificate of confidentiality.4col. anderson mentioned that an investigator may request that researchrecords be maintained under special coded identification numbers, with a linkageto the individual's social security number. the key linking the studyidentification number and the social security number is then stored separatelyunder extremely limited access.4the certificate of confidentiality is described in the public health services act (§301(d)). it provides protection for research data from subpoena by law enforcement agencies.the investigator applies directly to the appropriate official, which varies depending on thenature of the sensitive data. the types of data that may be eligible for protection includeinformation pertaining to sexual matters, drug use, illegal activity, mental health, or otherinformation that could damage the subject's financial standing, reputation, or could be insome way stigmatizing. see also wolf and lo, 1999.appendix b128protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.enforcement of procedures to protect confidentialityms. khan concluded that irbs function best when working in acollaborative, educational relationship with the investigators. the uthscsairb requires periodic status reports on all studies but does not itself auditinvestigators or otherwise engage in active surveillance to ensure compliance.indeed, if a compliance assurance role proves necessary, she argued that it wouldbe more effectively carried out by another office so as not to lose the positiverelationship with investigators that the irb has developed.regarding col. anderson's presentation, committee member peter szolovitscommended the army's ability to maintain effective barriers between differentparts of the organization so as to keep a file of identifiers for use if necessary butnot risk improper disclosure, and asked if such a centralized resource forpsuedonymizing data could be used at other institutions. col. anderson repliedthat the centralization of subject data demographics, control of data privacy, andenforcement of procedures to maintain them might be implemented effectively ina military organization but be impracticable or impossible in a civilian setting.additional recommendations by presentersms. khan offered several additional recommendations. first, in multisiteprojects, personally identifiable health information generally ought not to beshared beyond the local investigators. second, she suggested that studiesinvolving collection of data through telephone interviews, which are frequentlyused to collect information about services rendered (though not the focus of thisworkshop), should be carefully reviewed and not necessarily approved if thesubject's name and telephone number will be given to a contract researchorganization to make the calls. finally, ms. khan emphasized that irbs can andshould develop collaborative relationships with other parts of their institutions.as an example, she suggested consulting with university committees that reviewresearch for appropriateness and research allocation. she explained that sincethese bodies tend to be concerned with both costs and legal exposure duringresearch, it is important that they and the irb coordinate their policies.coordination both avoids frustrating investigators with inconsistent requirementsand builds in more internal support for compliance with the policies.general discussion following presentationscommittee member lisa lezzoni commented that some irbs either prefer,or believe themselves required, to insist on using exactly the same language onthe consent form as would be used for clinical trials. in her experience, the resultis that potential participants in a health services research study that may involve areview only of their records are warned about risk of physical injury, possiblyincluding death. ms. khan and several irb administrators and/or chairs repliedappendix b129protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that their irbs work to ensure that the language of the consent form reflects theactual risks of the protocol.dr. iezzoni also mentioned that one branch of hsr, qualitative healthservices research, involves detailed interviews with a small sample of patients andthat, in these cases, additional precautions are needed to protect the privacy of theparticipants. for instance, if the interviews are taped or videotaped, the voicesand/or faces may have to be masked.finally, a member of the audience, dr. joanne lynne of rand, urged thecommittee to be mindful of the plight of very small hospices and other health careproviders who wish to carry out quality improvement projects. suchorganizations may lack the resources to locate or negotiate with an irb.academic irb chairsdr. james kahn, chair of the committee for human research at theuniversity of california in san francisco (ucsf), presented first, followed bydr. robert amdur of the university of florida, recently irb chair at dartmouthmedical school.identifying specific studies as hsrdr. kahn said that hsr studies at ucsf are reviewed in the same way asother studies involving human subjects, except that the wording in the informedconsent form would be modified to reflect the type of research and would notwarn of physical injury. dr. kahn commented that if data are to be collectedsystematically, the project ought to be reviewed by the irb, since it is reasonablylikely that the investigator will publish the results if the findings prove to be ofinterest.dr. amdur said that the differentiation of health services research fromvarious types of health operations such as internal quality assessment is criticaland argued that irbs ought not to take on the task of protecting privacy in nonresearch settings. instead, protection of privacy in a nonresearch setting ought tobe addressed in other ways. he was concerned not only about the workload ofirbs but also about placing administrative burdens on quality improvementprojects and health care operations. he suggested that the way to distinguishresearch from other activities is to determine whether the project would be donein the same way if the project directors knew they would not be able to publish orotherwise present the results in an academic forum (amdur et al., in press). thatis, if the project would be done even if the findings could not be published ordisseminated, it is not research. he pointed out that the fact of publication alonewould not be a sufficient criterion because the results of nonresearch assessmentsare in fact sometimes published, but that research is always undertaken with aview to contributing to public, general, knowledge.appendix b130protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.determining which hsr studies qualify as exemptdr. amdur argued that current federal regulations are applicable andappropriate for evaluating health services research. current regulations alreadyallow waiving of informed consent when risk would be minimal and the projectcould not reasonably be carried out if informed consent were required. from thisperspective, he continued, the problem then resolves again to the need for the irbto take a rigorous view of what is research and to turn back any proposals thatought, under the regulatory definition of research, to be viewed as a health careoperations or qa activity.weighing importance of the research relative to riskdr. amdur commented that for irbs that are operating according to thecommon rule, the fundamental risk assessment approach is not a new task andthe regulatory structure is already, for the most part, in place. he continued thatreviewing hsr protocols, in particular the evaluation of risks associated withpossible invasions of privacy or breaches of confidentiality, does not make therisk assessment task any different. an irb could need additional knowledge orexpertise about how privacy might be invaded (whether intentionally orinadvertently) since some means now available have only recently beendeveloped.additional recommendations by presentersdr. kahn reported that in response to several recent incidents in which theirbs of other institutions had been criticized for inadequate oversight, the vicechancellor of the ucsf had commissioned an ad hoc committee to consider somespecific questions in reviewing the ucsf irb's function. the ad hoc committeewas asked to consider the composition, procedures, and support of the irb andwhether it could be of better service to the university. the committee returned alist of recommendations, including several suggestions about increasing the useof electronic information systems, increased training for researchers to addressboth research responsibilities and institutional procedures, and increasing staffsupport for the human subjects protection program. in addition, the chairspecifically suggested designating 1 to 1.5 percent of each grant involving humansubjects to be earmarked as funding for the human subjects protection program.dr. amdur suggested that the growth of multisite research projects wouldrequire changes in irb function and structure. because many hsr projectsdepend on data from many different sites, the current system of review by eachlocal irb creates an administrative burden that may discourage valuable hsrprojects. he suggested testing a central irb to review multisite hsr studies.appendix b131protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.general discussion following presentationsin additional general discussion, committee member lisa iezzoni mentionedexperiences where different irbs from different institutions are involved andreturn inconsistent assessments. several participants agreed that this is notuncommon and must be resolved by negotiation on a casebycase basis.in discussions of problems turning on what party has a claim to data, eitherfor gaining or for withholding access, several participants asked to whom the databelonged. committee member adele waller explained that, as a legal matter,disputes over how to handle data between different institutions cannot be resolvedsimply by determining ownership of the data. she continued that several partiestypically have legitimate rights and responsibilities pertaining to the data,distinctions that the concept ﬁownershipﬂ is unable to capture, and that no singleparty has ownership.research institute irb chairsresearch institutes that are separate from universities carry out a great dealof hsr. when such research is federally funded, these institutions are subject tothe common rule. some research institutes have multiple project assurances5through the oprr in which they have agreed to comply with the common rulefor any human subjects research. the research institutes that participated in theworkshop are not affiliated with health care organizations such as integratedhealth care systems or health maintenance organizations (hmos), so they do notface the issue of distinguishing hsr from quality improvement or businessfunctions. because research institutes do not carry out clinical care or payment,all of their activities would be research.the first presenter was dr. tora bikson, senior social scientist and irbchair at rand. she was followed by dr. steven a. garfinkel, an irb chair andhealth services researcher at research triangle institute (rti).rand's multiple project assurance agreement stipulates that the institutionwill be guided by the ethical principles in the belmont report (belmont, 1979)and will adhere to federal regulations regarding human subjects protection for allresearch involving human subjects regardless of sponsorship. rti also followsthe common rule in all human subjects research.identifying specific studies as hsrdr. bikson noted that the organizational unit that carries out a study cannotbe viewed as an indication of whether the study is hsr. various parts of5an ﬁassuranceﬂ is an agreement or contract between an institution and the oprr, onbehalf of the secretary of health and human services. the assurance stipulates themethods by which the institution will protect the welfare of research subjects inaccordance with the regulations. an mpa is a type of assurance designed for institutionsthat engage in large amounts of healthrelated research. an mpa can be approved for 5year intervals.appendix b132protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.rand, including the health research program, but also for example, theeducation program and the criminal justice program, carry out hsr studies butthey are reviewed by the same irb. as noted above, rand requires all itsresearch involving human subjects to be in accord with the common rule and tobe reviewed by its irb.dr. garfinkel said that rti does surveillance, cost and use studies (forexample, an evaluation of oregon's medicaid reform project), programevaluation, and outcomes assessments. rti also does coordination of clinicaltrials and epidemiological work. in the former areas, it works with medicalrecords and insurance enrollment and claims (as well as interviews and tissuespecimens). rti actually maintains three irbs, two of which include physicians.the hsr proposals go to the third irb, which does not include physicians, forreview.determining which hsr qualify studies as exemptthe committee heard that rand has implemented an online system toensure that there is appropriate irb review of all protocols. the irb is notifiedwhenever a project receives an internal funding account numberšin fact,assigning such a number automatically triggers a message to the investigatorcontaining a brief screening questionnaire about the project. if the screenerindicates that the project might require irb review, a more detailed questionnairethen helps the investigator explore alternatives of exemption from irb review,expedited review, or full review (figure 22). the online system may indicatethat a project would be exempt from irb review if it will use only anonymous orpublic use datasets or deidentified data sets if neither rand nor any anotherparty on the contract has access to the identifiers. dr. bikson emphasized that thesystem is designed to be inclusive, that is, to send any borderline cases to irbmembers for specific attention. in less clear situations, the irb chair and/orselected members would have to decide whether the particular project could beexempt. examples of borderline situations where an irb member would have toexamine the project to decide whether further irb review might be neededinclude projects that will use anonymous or nonsensitive primary data gatheredthrough surveys, interviews or other methods requiring a direct interaction withsubjects; projects that gather data from public officials or candidates; orintervention research that is anonymous and without risk.determining whether information is identifiable in assessing risk ofdisclosuredr. bikson noted that the determination of whether identifiable informationwill be involved remains challenging, and it is important to realize thatidentifiability could enter the process at various points, from subject selection todata combination to subject compensation. she reminded participants thatinformation may be directly identifiable (e.g., a social security number) but mayalso beappendix b133protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 22 rand's system for identifying reviewable research. source: adapted from slide presented by dr. tora bikson at theworkshop on institutional review boards and health services research data privacy.appendix b134protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.identifiable by inference from the combination of several data fieldsšidentifiability by inference is therefore one of the key concerns of privacy inresearch utilizing databases. she suggested a general rule used by rand thatmay be of interest to others: if sorting data according to any variables producessubsets with ten or fewer members, then these individuals will be at risk foridentifiability by inference.dr. bikson, seconded by several participants, commented that researchersoften would strongly prefer to work with deidentified data, but that even if theyrequest such data and supply deidentifying algorithms to providers, they mayreceive data complete with identifiers because the provider lacked time and staffto remove identifying fields.dr. garfinkel commented that when rti researchers collect data fromsurveys and claims, they are often required to produce public use files as part ofthe product. he noted that in the course of producing such files, they havelikewise had to work at the problem of determining which fields may lead toidentifiability or at least increase the risk of unintended disclosure of personalinformation.weighing importance of the research relative to riskdr. garfinkel explained that when rti plans to produce a public access file,it informs respondents that their data will be kept confidential, by which it meansthat data will not be released in an identifiable form. he reported that in rti'sexperience, informing respondents that their data will be included in a public usefile, even though not in identifiable form, will needlessly lower the response rate.he observed that the scientific benefit of a study could be seriously impaired byunnecessarily alarming individuals about their privacy in the consent form.ensuring that identifiable information is protected during the studydr. bikson said that rand's irb includes a threeperson privacy team. theteam, includes an information resource specialist (who specializes in securitymeasures such as encryption and creating codes to substitute for identifyingdata), a data librarian (who specializes in rules and practices for dealing with verylarge datasets acquired from other organizations), and a network specialist (whospecializes in conditions and limitations of safe data transfer over the network).these irb members help design and implement data safeguarding planscommensurate with the level of risk for various protocols. dr. bikson emphasizedthat data safeguarding includes maintaining physical control of the data especiallywhile in transit and that the risk of physical access to data by unauthorized partiesis sometimes overlooked even while more sophisticated technical securitymeasures may be attended to.beyond physical delivery, dr. bikson continued, the treatment of datasets tobe merged and manipulated is important to preserve data integrity and also toprotect subject privacy. rand's suggested procedure calls for first replacing anyappendix b135protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.direct identifiers with codes. the file linking the code to the subject's identity isthen encrypted and stored separately from the encoded data file. then whenanother dataset is obtained, it is possible to regenerate the link file, replace directidentifiers in the new file with the subject codes, and merge the coded files.dr. bikson noted that because physical and technical protections are notsufficient, rand has implemented procedural protective measures. theseprocedures include annual reviews for all projects, including inactive projects,until such time as the direct identifiers and link files have been destroyed and anyremaining data that might be identifiable by inference have been eliminated oraltered so that identities cannot be inferred.dr. garfinkel discussed briefly some situations in which beneficence mayrequire breach of confidentiality. rti would consider such a breach in cases ofsubjects exhibiting suicidal ideation or intent. child abuse is another difficultarea, and the reporting of cases may be required in some states. dr. garfinkeldescribed an rti project on child abuse in which researchers review records fromcounty social services with varying reporting laws. since the laws differ bylocale, rti designed a uniform national guideline and consent form and thenasked local interviewers to inform rti when they were in danger of differing fromlocal laws.dr. garfinkel said that in some studies they receive coded data, for example,medicare enrollment data with id codes but no names or addresses, so theinvestigators can track costs and utilization by each subject without knowing theidentity of these individuals. in other instances, dr. garfinkel noted, they mightreceive files of names and addresses for the purpose of contacting individuals.when they make a contact, they first ask permission from the individual tocontinue the project and to do a data linkage, thus obtaining an ﬁex post factoﬂconsent (or dropping the individual from the study if this is what the individualprefers).enforcement of procedures to protect confidentialitydr. bikson said that rand has observed that networked, distributed, andbackedup digital environments together pose new types of threats to privacy.some researchers, for instance, may not realize that taking a diskette with backupfiles home to work on a personal computer that is connected to a digitalsubscriber line (dsl) line (which is on all the time) can create a serious securitybreach. such examples suggest that the role of technical experts may beunderappreciated, and new technologies to protect privacy may yet be unexploredor insufficiently exploited. she concluded that policy control must be developedto replace physical oversight to ensure privacy protection, because it is in manycases impossible, and surely impractical, to observe directly whether researcherscarrying out electronic manipulations are conforming to data protection rules.appendix b136protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.additional recommendations by presentersdr. bikson observed that professionals in other areas of study already havegained long experience in the types of privacy concerns that hsr is now facing,so researchers in health services might learn from, for example, researchers in thecriminal justice system.dr. garfinkel reaffirmed the importance of health services researchers'having the freedom to work with their irbs to modify standard consent andconfidentiality language as appropriate for the particular study in question.dr. garfinkel also commented on the distinct issue of studies using tissuespecimens (although not the primary focus of this project), saying thatrequirements for informed consent for tissue storage are as yet misunderstood bysome researchers. in addition, such research raises issues of how to communicatestorage provisions on the consent form. the consent form separates stages ofconsent, requesting the candidate to consider and consent separately toparticipation in the study, to provision of the specimen, and then to allowing thespecimen to be stored for later use.commercial, nonaffiliated irbsalthough the traditional model of an irb envisions a board closelyassociated with a particular institution that draws its membership from theinstitution and surrounding community, there are also nonaffiliated orfreestanding irbs that provide review services for a fee. for many, the bulk oftheir business involves clinical trials, but some also review health servicesresearch. some nonaffiliated irbs regard their niche as providing consultativeservices primarily to relatively small institutions that do not have mpas andtherefore might find the support of an inhouse irb review to be difficult. dr.angela bowen, chief executive officer of western institutional review board(wirb) attended the workshop and spoke about wirb.determining which hsr studies qualify as exempta central feature of wirb's approach is its commitment to makingindividual, specific, informed consent a part of all human subjects research itsees.several health services researchers pointed out that since it is not uncommonfor hsr protocols to utilize databases containing on the order of hundreds ofthousands or even millions of records, it would be difficult to design a workableindividual informed consent associated with a particular research protocol. dr.bowen replied, however, that protocols of this type rarely, if ever, go tocommercial irbs, so wirb has not experienced that particular problem.appendix b137protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.determining whether information is identifiable in assessing risk ofdisclosurelike other irbs, the wirb committee struggles with determining whetherdata will be identifiable. in reviewing protocols for potential privacy risks, itconsiders data to be identifiable if there is any link between the data and thesubject's identity, in which case, again, it would insist on informed consent by thesubject.general discussion following presentationseveral participants raised questions about how nonaffiliated irbs can takeinto account the values and attitudes of the community in which the research isconducted. dr. bowen explained that nonaffiliated irbs can develop solidrelationships with clients, especially repeat clients, so they work closely with thelocal institutions. other discussion addressed the accountability of a nonaffiliatedirb, since it does not report directly to an institution, and dr. bowen noted thatcommercial irbs are audited regularly by the fda and oprr.health care products and services industrymany health care organizations carry out a spectrum of activities thatinvolve the secondary analysis of personal health information. the spectrumranges from health services research to operations. representatives of severaltypes of organizations that are largely concerned with the delivery of healthservicesšthat is, operationsšalong with research functions spoke about theirexperience in the review of hsr by irbs.pharmaceutical manufacturer's epidemiological researchdr. harry guess, executive director of epidemiology at merck researchlaboratories, discussed epidemiological surveillance of drugs and vaccines ascarried out within a pharmaceutical company. the purpose of these studies is toassess the efficacy and safety of the product in clinical trials and the safety of theproduct in actual postmarketing use. much of the epidemiological analysisutilizes previously collected data.identifying specific studies as research under the regulationsdr. guess explained that in most cases, although not federally funded,pharmaceutical company epidemiological work will be under the purview of thecommon rule, either because it is subject to regulation by the food and drugadministration or because it is done in conjunction with a university or otherorganization that requires it.appendix b138protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ensuring that identifiable information is protected during the studydr. guess observed that the approaches used to protect confidentiality ofdata in research sponsored by pharmaceutical companies differ by type of data. inthe case of adverse event reporting, he explained, the company may be unable toavoid knowing the identity of the patient or the physician because one of theseindividuals actually called in the report. such information is subject to additionallevels of security. the reports to regulatory agencies do not identify patients orphysicians. in clinical trials, however, he said that the identity of the participantsis generally not given to the merck officials at all, but rather is replaced by a codeat each study site. for protection of privacy, he concluded, merck must thereforerely on the irbs and investigators at each study site, since the identifiableinformation generally is not transmitted to merck. he continued that for otherpotentially identifying information, such as birthdates, merck typically requeststhat only ranges be reported whenever possible. finally, dr. guess noted thatmerck audits study sites to make sure they are in compliance with fdaregulations and the fda also conducts inspections.enforcement of procedures to protect confidentialitythe situation of records research at merck was of particular interest at theworkshop because of the affiliation of merck with medco, a pharmacy benefitmanagement company. in the discussion after the presentation, participantsinquired about the degree of separation between the merck research databases andthe medco administrative and pharmacy usage databases. dr. guess said thatfederal trade law requires the two branches of the company to be unambiguouslyseparate with regard to inside information. thus, when other divisions of merckwish to utilize data from merckmedco for research, they must negotiate apurchase of access to the data as any other research organization would.intermountain health careintermountain health care is a notforprofit integrated health care deliverysystem, including hospitals and clinics in four states and tertiary services in alarger area. the organization has strongly promoted electronic medical recordssince the 1950s. dr. brent james and mr. morris linton of intermountain healthcare participated in the workshop.identifying specific studies as hsrdr. james began with the persistent problem of distinguishing the activitiesof hsr from operations, since intermountain health care (ihc), unlike theresearch foundations, does both. he explained that ihc views these activities asencompassing a continuum ranging from health care operations performanceassessment,appendix b139protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to records review or epidemiological research, to clinical research. then, in thisview, confidentiality protection also forms a continuum (figure 23).dr. james said that the clinical research end of the spectrum is overseen byan irb, and confidentiality concerns pertaining to clinical research would also bereviewed by the irb. the hospitals in the ihc system that do the most researchhave an mpa and shared irb structure. investigations and analyses on the healthcare operations end of the spectrum that do not meet the definition of ﬁresearch,ﬂdo not fall under the purview of irb oversight. here dr. james observed thatwhen irbs go beyond their original role of protecting human subjects fromdirect harms due to research, they may tend both to cause confusion and toneglect their primary mission. finally, dr. james noted that just as the vastmajority of uses of patient data occur in the course of health care operations, soalso the vast majority of breaches of confidentiality occur in operations (indeedhe said that all the known privacy violations in ihc have occurred in health careoperations, none in research).determining which hsr studies qualify as exemptdr. james explained that ihc has an information security committee, whichit believes may be similar to the privacy boards described in the proposed rule.this committee is constituted similarly to an irb, consisting of communitymembers as well as line administrators and scientists (including computerspecialists). the committee oversees and coordinates irb functions in theorganization. it also determines whether projects from the area in the middle ofthe health care operations and research spectrum should proceed to seek irbreview.ensuring that identifiable information is protected during the studydr. james continued that the information security committee generates andrecommends data security policies to the board of trustees of the company. thecommittee then helps implement the policies and procedures throughout theorganization.enforcement of procedures to protect confidentialitydr. james said that, first, all ihc employees must sign a confidentialityagreement, which must be renewed every two years, and then comply with aﬁneedtoknowﬂ policy limiting who has access to which data. the company alsotracks data access with automatic electronic logs and has designed the elec tronicrecords system to ensure that identifiable portions are accessible only todesignated employees. ihc terminates employment because of privacyinfractions.appendix b140protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.figure 23 intermountain health care's approach to operations: research spectrum. source: adapted from a slide presented by dr. brentjames at the workshop on institutional review boards and health services research data privacy.appendix b141protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.dr. james expects the user authentication problem to be addressed muchmore effectively in the future with, for instance, biological logons1 rather thanpasswords to restrict access.additional recommendations by presenterdr. james noted that ihc believes that patients as well as providers shouldbe able to view their own records and add comments (although nothing can bechanged or deleted). with rare exceptions, ihccovered patients have thisaccess.regarding patient perception of privacy, dr. james observed that manytypes of professionals within a health system generate and use patient informationand that patients understand that many professionals, as well their ownphysicians, will need access to their medical records. it is important to besensitive to patients' perceptions, however, so when it is necessary to contact thepatient for a research project or other purposes, the contact should be initiated by aprofessional who would be, and would be perceived by the patient as being,reasonably expected to have access to the patient's records.finally, dr. james suggested that truly deidentifying a health care record isimpossible if there is any link to any potentially identifying information. hence,the way to minimize confidentiality breaches is to control access to the link thatleads to identifiability. he suggested further that a record is identified only when ahuman being sees it, so that if a computer program links records usingidentifiable data but returns a nonidentifiable output, then that would notconstitute a privacy violation.pharmacy benefit management companyms. jennifer low and dr. fred teitelbaum of express scripts discussedprivacy and confidentiality in the context of pharmacy benefit management.express scripts is a pharmacy benefit management (pbm) company, servingvarious types of clients including insurers, unions, health care organizations, andemployersšany type of organization, in short, that wishes to contract for a1biological logons, also called biometric identifiers, would permit a user to have accessto a file based on some recognizable and unique feature. in wiederhold's online glossary,(http://wwwdb.stanford.edu/pub/gio/cs99i/security.html#biometric) biometricidentifiers are explained as follows: are more reliable than passwords. biometricidentifiers: voice prints, signature dynamics, keystroke dynamics, hand measurements,finger prints, face recognition. the pattern of the iris in a person's eye is also a candidatefor making a unique identification. biometric identifiers are difficult to forge, but theequipment needed to read them is awkward and forbidding. the person being identifiedmust cooperate for instance be willing to speak or write a specific expression clearly or bescanned by a camera in a welllighted space. voice recognition is probably the easiesttechnique to integrate into computer workstations. the voice pattern can also be recordedon a smartcard, which can be linked securely to its owner. that card can containpasswords, that are easily handled by the networks that verify access privileges.appendix b142protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmacy benefit. among other things, the company provides pharmacy networkmanagement, claim adjudication services, and drug utilization review and alsofunctions as a mail service pharmacy.identifying specific studies as hsrms. low and dr. teitelbaum both observed that, as members of a pbmcompany, it is difficult if not impossible for them to distinguish hsr fromoperations. express scripts conducts internal analyses of data to improveoperations (e.g., plan design, but also formulary decisions and assessment ofoutcomes), although results are published whenever possible. however,confidentiality standards (which include the protection and ultimate purging ofidentifiable data) apply when such data are first used to create the research dataset.ms. low explained that, especially when it was smaller, the companyregarded itself as a pharmacy and thus bound by professional standards and lawwithout need for additional policy. as the size and scope of its operationsincreased, the company has undertaken more formal policy development. shealso said that the company's primary means of ensuring that its appropriateauthorization to use data on patients is by asking the plan sponsor (i.e., themanaged care organization, employer, etc.) to obtain authorization fromindividual plan participants.determining whether information is identifiable in assessing risk ofdisclosuredr. teitelbaum reported that express scripts has instituted increasinglystringent policies of limiting internal access to data.ensuring that identifiable information is protected during the studydr. teitelbaum described processes of data use: the data are typically kept in adeidentified format, with a crossreference for identification stored separatelyand securely. deidentification of the data includes not only the removal ofnames but also, for example, the use of age rather than date of birth and the useof only the first three digits of the zip code.dr. teitelbaum continued that the company is in the process of instituting aprivacy board to ensure that it does follow appropriate and effective proceduresfor maintaining confidentiality. its practices regarding data retention varyaccording to state law (typically two to three years for prescriptions) or employeeretirement income security act (erisa) (six to seven years), but deidentifieddata may be kept indefinitely.appendix b143protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health maintenance organizations and researchmr. andrew nelson, executive director of healthpartners and president ofthe hmo research network, offered some perspective on the amount of hsrthat occurs in the managed care industry.mr. nelson reported that the fraction of hmos that formally and regularlyengage in research is relatively small (nelson et al., 1998). there are 1,315licensed managed care organizations, 24 of which have formal research programsdoing public domain research. of the 24 hmos that are active in research 13established the hmo research network. mr. nelson also noted that many ofthese hmobased research organizations follow the common rule whether thefunding source would require it or not.mr. nelson said that, like many observers, he has noted that many irbs arebusy to the point of being overwhelmed and that increasing demands on them alsodecrease the satisfaction of what is, in many cases, voluntary work. he offeredfor consideration ten recommendations to help ease the overall problem ofproperly protecting confidentiality in hsr without unduly stressing irbs. thefirst six address recommendations what institutions need; the last four areexternal to the research hmo:1. a framework to define the intersection between research and qualityimprovement.2. an internal auditing process.3. training and educational programs.4. individual data access and confidentiality certification for anyone whomay have access.5. internal and external data access policy as a broad foundation for dataprivacy.6. information technology policy defining how to apply privacy protections.7. encouraging academic institutions to incorporate research ethics andresearch subjects protections into their curricula,8. development readytouse tools for hsr investigators to apply.9. asking irbs to apply the common rule regardless of the funding sourceof the study.10. increasing government involvement to include education as well asoversight of irbs.special considerations of data privacy andminority groupsdr. william freeman, irb chair at the indian health service, highlightedsome issues of particular importance in research involving minority populations.he concentrated on american indian, alaska native, canadian first nations,appendix b144protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.inuit, and kanaka maoli or native hawaiian groups. dr. freeman emphasizedthat he has not seen any specific instance of harm to minority groups due to hsr,but the potential for privacy violation exists. he noted further that the potentialharm may affect not only the individuals and groups that might be subjects, butalso the research enterprise because if a group participates in research and regardsthe privacy of the group or individual members to have been violated, then anyresearcher approaching that group or perhaps other groups, as well, will not beable to secure cooperation.levels of privacy concernsdr. freeman pointed out that hsr usually addresses large sets of data inwhich individual subjects may have little in common and are difficult to identify.he suggested that in local, small, minority groups the situation is quite different,with serious implications for privacy. first, he noted, the groups mentioned areoften relatively small and isolated communities whose members are well knownto one another, so the privacy of individuals within the group may be much moredifficult to protect than the privacy of an individual in a large city with a diversepopulation. at the same time, a second type of privacy concern can affect suchpopulations. because the minority group in question may have strongintracommunity ties and be distinct from the surrounding culture or cultures insignificant respects, its members are likely to place a high value on the integrityof the group. in this context, privacy may refer to the group as a whole rather thanto individuals.strategies for enhancing both privacy protection and trustdr. freeman reaffirmed that both physical and electronic data security arevery important and frequently not given adequate attention in rural areas. he alsopointed out that data fields that might appear at first sight not to be identifying in alarge population could lead to the identification of one or a few individuals in asmall community. he suggested that the way to avoid such mistakes would be toinclude in the protocol review, consultation with individuals knowledgeableabout the particular culture or group in question. he also suggested that in somecases the use of formal, individual contractsšin which the researchers promisenot to attempt to identify any individual and to notify the irb if an individualmay have been identified inadvertentlyšmay help build the trust of thecommunity in the research project.general discussionin the discussion after the presentation, several participants raised thequestions of what is an appropriate role for the community in the research processand of how to involve affected parties in the community when there is nocohesiveappendix b145protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.group and therefore no generally accepted spokesperson (though many, of coursevolunteering for that role, with divergent views). although a definitive answer didnot emerge, several participants suggested that it is generally possible to speakwith several groups when there is no single representative.technical considerations and productsmr. lawrence dietz of axent technologies, an attorney and marketresearch analyst specializing in information security, briefed the committee onmarket and technical trends in data security.web access security products are becoming increasingly necessary forsecurity maintenance and enhancement as more organizations wish to store,retrieve, and exchange information via intranet. although the products areemerging, it is not yet clear what the costs may be of providing full servicing forthem.regarding public key infrastructure (pki), the industry and researchers arevery enthusiastic, and some observers believe the hipaa and several laws in theeuropean union to be driving the market to develop pki products.2 marketadoption of pki is, however, proceeding only slowly, especially in the unitedstates. this may be due at least in part to the fact that the process of integratingpki with individual legacy applications is very labor intensive. one reasonintegration is difficult is that it is so complex; indeed, a pki encryption devicemay be asked to solve a wide variety of problems including authentication,access, and authorization. the development and market penetration of smartcards and other portable platforms for utilizing databases via pki seems to bemuch further advanced in europe than in the united states, although unresolvedquestions about crossborder privacy protection remain.as the technology of webintegrated systems becomes more ubiquitous andeasier to use, it is also becoming more difficult to defend from outside attack(dietz, 2000). internal and external filtering techniques can be viewed asnecessary in any operation utilizing electronic records, since it would be criticalto minimize any time when the system is not available. filtering systems, forexample, would be able to detect a pattern when a denialofservice attack islaunched from multiple points requesting the same data at the same time and alsocan guard against local systems being coopted from the outside to serve aslaunching points for such an attack (also described as ﬁbeing used as zombiesﬂ).2a public key infrastructure is a system for managing and distributing public keys anddigital certificates to authenticate different usersšthat is, to ensure that the assertedidentity of a given user in fact corresponds to user. (in facetoface interactions, one personcan ﬁauthenticateﬂ himself to another by presenting a document such as a driver's licenseor a passport. by telephone, a speaker can authenticate himself to another person by virtueof a familiar voice. in cyberspace, however, some other mechanism is needed to provideauthentication among parties that do not know in advance that they need to interactšthatmechanism is pki.) pkis are an essential component of secure electroniccommunications, but also raise important concerns for privacy (see for example, brands,1999).appendix b146protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cost pressures are of course resulting in both specific and general trends.specifically, many or perhaps most organizations are installing virtual privatenetworks, enhancing security relative to standard internet email while also savingmoney. more generally, many organizations are exhibiting a marked preferenceto hire services, that is, to contract out to meet their information technologyneeds, rather than to purchase products and train inhouse support; this practicehas corresponding security risks as more people have access to electronic recordswhile being less invested in the culture of the organization.in the future, additional work on security will likely be required at the smalloffice and home office level, a point that often arises in consideration ofacademic researchers who deal with secure data but often work at home.special considerations of data privacy andminors3federal regulations on human subjects include special provisions that applywhen subjects are of minor age (45 cfr 46 subpart d). the contract describingthe iom's project included an agreement that the committee would considermeasures for protecting personally identifiable health information that pertains tochildren if any different conditions should be deemed desirable, and, inparticular, would consider the desirability of requiring projects involving childrenalways to undergo full irb review. for background on these matters, thecommittee commissioned a paper on protecting the data from health servicesresearch in minors. the paper was presented in draft form at the workshop andappears in full as appendix c of the (iom, 2000) report.there are three basic issues that further complicate the question of how toconduct research involving minors that meets high ethical and scientificstandards:heterogeneity of the population in question, arising from proxy consent, andchanging interests and risks affecting the subjects.the heterogeneity of the subject population arises from the intersection ofthe legal definition of the term ﬁminorﬂ with the developmental process ofmaturation from infancy to adulthood. the law recognizes any person under theage of majority, for most purposes 18 years old, as a child, but the maturation of aperson from infancy through the age of majority is a dynamic process,encompassing a very wide range of capacities, interests, concerns, and also risks.the law recognizes that children do not have the decisionmaking capacityof adults and addresses this fact through beneficent paternalism. in the case ofmedical or research interventions, beneficent paternalism requires that consentfor the intervention be made by an adult proxy, in most cases the child's parent(s).3this section is based on a presentation by dr. ross thompson, developmentalpsychologist and author of the commissioned paper author.appendix b147protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the question of uncoerced and informed consent to participate in research bringswith it problems when subjects are adults, and proxy consent brings furthercomplications. in some cases, the adult proxy may have interests that differ from,or even conflict with, those of the child. a further complication arises when thechild does reach the age of majority: if an adult has given proxy consent for dataon the child to be examined in research, is this consent still valid when the childreaches adulthood, or must consent be sought anew?the maturation of children not only means that the category ﬁchildrenﬂ isheterogeneous, as described above, but also that as a particular individualmatures, the interests of this individual change and the changes themselves arecomplex. the lawšand most peoplešreadily recognize that research on childreninvolves special risks, which must be taken into account and do not apply to adultsubjects. the risks, concerns and areas of vulnerability of children do not,however, necessarily diminish inversely with an increase in age and body mass;indeed, some risks increase. risks that may increase as the child matures includevulnerability to embarrassment, fear of exposure, and concern for violations ofprivacyšjust the risks most likely to be associated with health services research.in the discussion after the presentation, participants raised several additionalpoints. in consideration of protecting privacy, some features of children assubjects increase the difficulty of deidentifying data. for example,hospitalization is rare for children, so even within a large sample of children, dataon hospitalization or very high medical bills may effectively identify one or asmall number of individuals. another special problem is that the effect of theidentification of individual children might have additional impact on other familymembers, since the mother may then be identified as well.participant gerald s. schatz pointed out that the difficulties associated withproxy consent are further intensified in the case of children who are wards of thestate, and proxies who are government agencies and liable to be overburdened orto prefer not to see problems.international comparisons of data privacystandards4questions and issues of protecting privacy and personally identifiable healthinformation have arisen in nation states around the world and in regard to thetransfer of data across international borders. the contract describing the iom'sproject included an agreement that the committee would compare the privacyprotections contained in international conventions for personally identifiablehealth information used in research with the principles and best practicesdeveloped in this study. for background on these matters, the committeecommissioned a paper comparing international approaches to protecting theprivacy of4this section is based on a presentation by ms. bartha maria knoppers, professor ofinternational law.appendix b148protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.data from health services research. the paper was presented in draft form at theworkshop and appears in full as appendix d of (iom, 2000) report.the organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd)published guidelines on the protection of privacy and transborder flows ofinformation in 1989, which included eight basic principles on the collection, use,and holding of personal data; these are further distilled here into four coreprinciples pertaining to data protection, including the creation of statutoryprotections, transparency of data processing, additional protections for sensitivedata, and the rights of individuals to claim enforcement of rules on dataprotection. the concept of privacy and the principle that individuals ought to besecure from improper interference in privacy are also mentioned in otherinternational agreements including the united nations universal declaration (1948) and international covenant on civil and political rights (1966); theeuropean convention on human rights (1955); the council of europe'sconvention for the protection of individuals, with regard to automaticprocessing of data (1981), convention on human rights and biomedicine (1997), and subsequent recommendations; the world health organization'sdeclaration on the promotion of patient's rights in europe (1994) and directiveon the protection of individuals (1995); the world medical association's reviseddeclaration of lisbon on the rights of the patient (1995); and the europeangroup on ethics in science and new technologies' ethical issues of health carein the information society (1999).turning to the internal or domestic arrangements in selected nation states,the united kingdom and other common law countries such as australia and newzealand recognize the protection of privacy under common law, although thelaw can be modified or clarified by statute. privacy under the common law is anaspect of the liberty of a citizen, and if this liberty is infringed upon so as to causeharm, the citizen can pursue legal action. as an exception to the generalprotection of privacy, however, a medical practitioner may be required to disclosecertain information in court if called for by the public interest. australia alsofollows common law with some statutory exceptions, one of which providesthat medical records are considered the property of the private medicalpractitioner, but not of the public health facility.by contrast, the legal systems of continental nation states did not developunder common law, but follow the napoleonic code and variations. rather thanbeing an aspect of liberty that might be harmed, privacy in this system is viewedas a right in and of itself, which means that a citizen need not show that aninfringement of privacy caused harmšan infringement of privacy is sufficientfor legal action regardless of whether harm followed. in france, theconfidentiality of medical records is further protected by being treated as anobligation of result, which means that not only what is heard or seen is protectedby law, but also what is understood, and the body of law that protects theinformation from disclosure is the penal code.in the domestic legal systems of individual nation states, the common lawversus civil code contrast is again the basic distinction. the united kingdom'sbritish medial association has recently affirmed that any disclosure should beappendix b149protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.anonymous and minimized to the degree possible and that patients should beinformed of how data about them may be used. australian law includes severalsets of principles and guidelines, that call for the entity in possession of a recordcontaining personal information to use the information only for the purpose forwhich it had been collected unless either the subject consents or another use ismandated by other law. france has recently undergone two importantdevelopments pertaining to the protection of the privacy of health information inits legal system. the first was a statute regulating the use of data for research,that provided significant new oversight mechanisms, and second was a decreeregarding the use of data in the process of reimbursement.at the conclusion of the presentations, the committee again thanked all theparticipants for their effort to provide information and insight, and encouragedanyone wishing to comment further or submit written materials to feel free to doso through the study director.appendix b150protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.referencesamdur, robert, speers, marjorie a., and bankert, elizabeth. irb triage of projects that involvemedical record review. in press.applebaum, paul s. threats to the confidentiality of medical recordsšno place to hide. jama.2000 feb 9; 283(6):795œ796.association of american medical colleges. aamc comments on the recommendations of thesecretary of health and human services on the ﬁconfidentiality of individually identifiablehealth information.ﬂ aamc testimony presented to the senate labor and humanresources committee. 1997 nov 10.belmont 1979. the belmont report. office of the secretary. ethical principles and guidelines for theprotection of human subjects of research. the national commission for the protection ofhuman subjects of biomedical and behavioral research. 1979 april.bradburn, norman m. populationšbased survey research. presentation done at national bioethicsadvisory commission. 2000 apr 6.brands, stefan. rethinking public key infrastructures and digital certificatesšbuilding in privacy.thesis of stefan brands. 1999 sep 4: 304 pages.buckovich, suzy a., rippen, helga e., and rozen, michael j. driving toward guiding principles: agoal for privacy, confidentiality, and security of health information. journal of americanmedical informatics association. 1999 marœ1999 apr 30; 6(2):123œ133.department of health and human services, and office of the secretary. standards for privacy ofindividually identifiable health information; proposed rule. federal register. 1999 nov 3;64(212):59918.dietz, lawrence. information warfare poses new threats: are you ready? internet securityadvisor. 2000 marœ2000 apr. 30:8œ10.etzioni, amitai. medical records. enhancing privacy, preserving the common good. hastingscenter report. 1999 marœ1999 apr 30:14œ23.appendix b151protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ghpp (health privacy working group). best principles for health privacy. health privacy project;institute for health care research and policy, georgetown university. 1999. available[online] http://www.healthprivacy.org/latest/bestprinciplesreport.pdf.goldman, janlori, and hudson, zoe. a health privacy primer for consumers exposed. healthprivacy project. institute for health care research and policy. georgetown university.washington, dc. 1999 dec. available [online] http://www.healthprivacy.org/resources/exposed.pdf.gostin, lawrence o., lazzarini, zita; neslund, verla, and osterholm, michael t. the public healthinformation infrastructure a national review of the law on health information privacy.jama. 1996 jun 26; 275(24):1921œ1927.iom (institute of medicine). committee on regional health data networks and molla donaldson,and kathleen n. lohr, editors. health data in the information age: use, disclosure, andprivacy. 1994. washington, dc: national academy press.iom (institute of medicine). committee on health services research: training and work forceissues and marilyn j. field, robert e. tranquada and jill c. feasley, editors. healthservices research: work. washington, dc: national academy press. 1995.iom (institute of medicine) committee on the role of institutional review boards in healthservices research data privacy protection. protecting data privacy in health servicesresearch. forthcoming. washington, dc: national academy press.ispe (international society for pharmacoepidemiology). data privacy, medical recordconfidentiality, and research in the interest of public health. [web page]. 1997 sep 1.available at: http://www.pharmacoepi.org/policy/privacy.htm.jhita (joint healthcare information technology alliance). advocacy paper: medical recordsconfidentiality legislation [web page]. available at: http://www.jhita.org/medical.htm.lo, bernard, and alpers, ann. uses and abuses of prescription drug information in pharmacybenefits management programs. jama. 2000 feb 9; 283(6):801œ806.lowrance, william w. privacy and health research: a report to the u.s. secretary of health andhuman services. 1997 may.nelson, andrew f., quiter, elaine s., and solberg, leif i. the state of research within managedcare plans: 1997 survey. health affairs. 1998 janœ1998 feb; 17(1):128œ138.nrc (national research council). committee on maintaining privacy and security in health careapplications of the national infrastructure, computer science and telecommunicationsboard, commission on physical sciences, mathematics and applications, and nationalresearch council. for the record. protecting electronic health information. washington,dc: national academy press. 1997.nrc (national research council) panel of confidentiality and data access, george t. duncan,thomas b. jabine, and virginia a. de wolf, editors. private lives and public policiesconfidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. 1993.o'brien, dale g., and yasnoff, william a. privacy, confidentiality, and security in informationsystems of state health agencies. american journal of preventive medicine. 1999; 16(4):351œ358.oprr, national institute of health. intitutional review board (irb) guidebook, 1993 [web page].1993. available at: http://grants.nih.gov/grants/oprr/irb/irbguidebook.htm.phrma. phrma policy papers: twin goals: privacy and progress [web page]. available at: http://www.phrma.org/issues/goals.html.appendix b152protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.shalala, donna. confidentiality of individually identifiable health information, recommendations ofthe secretary of health and human services, pursuant to section 264 of the health insuranceportability and accountability act of 1996. 1997 sep 11.wiederhold, gio. traveling the electronic highway: glossary maps, encounters, directions. termsrelevant to internet computing. 1998 jan.wolf, leslie e. and lo, bernard. practicing safer research using the law to protect theconfidentiality of sensitive research data.appendix b153protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b154protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.addendum a workshop speakersappendix b155robert amdur, m.d.associate professor and associatechairman for clinical affairsdepartment of radiation oncologyuniversity of florida health sciencescenterarthur anderson, m.d.fort detrick, u.s. armychief, department of clinicalpathology and office of humanuse and ethicsu.s. army medical researchinstitute of infectious diseasetora bikson, ph.d.senior behavioral scientistchair, irbrandangela bowen, m.d.presidentwestern institutional review boardlawrence dietz, esq.market intelligence directoraxent technologies, inc.william freeman, m.d., m.p.h.director, i.h.s. research programchair, headquarters i.h.s. irbrockville, mdsteven a. garfinkel, ph.d.associate directorhealth services and policy researchprogramresearch triangle instituteharry guess, ph.d.chief, epidemiologymerckbrent james, m.d.vice president for medical researchand continuing medical educationintermountain health careprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b156james kahn, m.d.institute for health policy studiesdepartment of medicine,university of california, sanfranciscos. angela khaninstitutional coordinator, researchreviewinstitutional review boarduniversity of texas health sciencecenter at san antoniobarthamaria knoppers, j.d.professor, faculty of lawsenior researcher, c.r.d.p.legal counsel, mcmaster gervaisuniversity of montrealmorris linton, jdsenior councilintermountain health carejennifer low, esq.associate general counselexpress scripts, inc.andrew nelsonexecutive director, healthpartnerspresident, hmo research networkminneapolis, mnthomas puglisi, ph.d.director, division of human subjectsprotectionsoffice for protection from researchrisksu.s. department of health andhuman servicesfred teitelbaum, ph.dvice presidentoutcomes research and costmanagementexpress scripts, health managementservicesross a. thompson, ph.d.professordepartment of psychologyuniversity of nebraskaprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.addendum b workshop participantsappendix b157olga boikessnimhbrian brownnational naval medical centerinstitutional review boardruth bulgerusuhsdonna t. chensoutheastern rural mental healthresearch center, university ofvirginiaangela choyinstitute for health care researchand policygeorgetown universitysarah comleycarrie crawfordnational naval medical centerinstitutional review boardtrenita davisnational institutes of health (nih)national institute of dental andcraniofacial researchnancy donovanu.s general accounting office(gao)gary b. ellisoffice for protection from researchrisksnational institutes of healthjohn p. fanningoffice of the assistant secretary forplanning and evaluationmichael fitzmauriceagency for healthcare research andqualityprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b158ellen gadboisnational bioethics advisorycommissionolga garciaoffice of management and budgetfelix gyichesapeake research review, inc.stephen heinigassociation of american medicalcollegestom hoganthe blue sheetjulie kaneshironational institutes of healthrichard a. knazeknational institutes of healtheric larsongeneral accounting officerichard levineusuhsjoanne lynnrandmargaret matulanational institutes of healthlaurie michelmerckmary ottoknight riddershannon penberthyassociation for health servicesresearchdouglas peddicordwashington health advocatesjoan porterorcamaryann redfordnational institutes of healthpatricia m. scannellwashington university school ofmedicinegerald s. schatznational institutes of healthamy schwarzhoffchesapeake research review, inc.ann skinnerjohns hopkins school of publichealthstuart f. spickermassachusetts college of pharmacy,bostonmiron straffnational research councilbernard talbatnational institutes of healthron warrenprotecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix cprotecting the health services researchdata of minorsross a. thompson, ph.d.there are many issues relevant to the confidentiality, security, and privacyof personally identifiable health information (phi) used for health servicesresearch purposes. these include (1) the nature of the confidentiality protectionsof privately funded health services research studies (which are not generallysubject to institutional review board [irb] approval), (2) the purposes for whichthe data were originally gathered, (3) the purposes for which they are used insecondary reanalysis, (4) the nature of the consent procedures originally used andthe confidentiality assurances that are part of the consent process, (5) protectionsof the data while the study is under way, and (6) who the relevant actors andagencies fundamental to such procedures are (e.g., hospital irbs, insurancecompanies managed care providers, physicians researchers).these are difficult issues that are relevant to the phi of all researchparticipants, regardless of developmental stage. for example, problems ofconfidentiality emerge in very large databases when health events of extremelylow frequency are studied and data relevant to these particular cases can easy leadto their identification. the steps that can be taken to ensure the confidentiality ofhealth data such as these are unlikely to vary significantly depending on whetherthe health events beset adults or infants (e.g., a multiply challenged baby in theneonatal intensive care unit).however, when children are research participants, there may be more uniquerisks to the confidentiality and privacy of their phi and special concerns in thesecondary analysis of their health data. this paper is devoted to framing theissues associated with protecting the health services research data of minorsappendix c159protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in light of how the phi of minors is commonly treated in health servicesresearch. in brief summary, these include the following issues: population. within the broad populationof legally defined ﬁminors,ﬂ research studies document considerablevariability in developing judgment, selfunderstanding, and psychosocialfunctioning. this means that: the capacities of children and youth to assent to the uses of their phi and tomeaningfully understand assurances concerning confidentiality, privacy, andresearch risk develop considerably with increasing age, with adultlikecapabilities evident early in adolescence; the psychological risks posed by the inappropriate disclosure of minors' phi(e.g., perceived privacy violations, feelings of embarrassment or humiliation,threats to their medical or legal interests) change complexly withdevelopment but, by late childhood, approximate the risks experienced byadults; collected phi, older children and adolescents may be concerned about accessto health data collected when they were younger and have a strong interest ingiving independent consent to its use.these considerations are relevant to all minors, especially to adolescentpopulations who can in some jurisdictions consent independently of theirparents to certain forms of medical treatment (e.g., substance abuse ormental health treatment). constitute a uniquely vulnerable population because of their limitedrights under the law and their limited capacities for autonomous decisionmaking. this means that special provisions are needed to ensure theirprotection from research risks, which include, but extend beyond, parentalproxy consent on their behalf. problems in proxy consent arise from (1) fundamental difficulties indistinguishing the interests of children from those of their parents or othercustodians, (2) the fact that consent also involves accepting provisions forcontrol over research materials, knowledge of research findings, andconditions governing children's elective withdrawal from researchparticipation in which parents' and children's interests may also differ, and(3) lack of clarity about whether proxy consent endures for the entire courseof the research investigation, including longitudinal or secondary analyses,regardless of children's developing capacities (and interests) in asserting andprotecting their own rights as research participants as they mature. special considerations in biomedical data result from the uniquely sensitivenature of such data, and the potential immediate and longertermimplications of phi for children in the context of family dynamics. theserequire immediateappendix c160protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.determinations about who has access to, and control over, children's phi thattake into consideration lifecourse concerns for children.taken together, it is clear that the health information of minors should beconsidered very differently from the phi of adults in a manner that reflects theirdeveloping capabilities and a lifespan consideration of children's interests.a case illustrationthese issues related to protection of the research data of minors are notexclusive to phi. to illustrate, consider the following hypothetical case study(based on actual published research):a research team inaugurates a large, longitudinal study of children's social andemotional adjustment in the 1970s. this research enlists a representative sampleof more than 2,000 children in the early gradeschool years from a large urbanpopulation. passive consent procedures are used (i.e., parents receive a letterdescribing the nature of the study and are asked to contact the investigators ifthey wish their child not to participate). the children are assessed annually onsix occasions after the study begins, with assessments including measures ofpeer relationships, selfperceptions, academic competence, and emotionalfunctioning.fifteen years after the study begins, a new researcher joins the team withinterests in the prediction of child maltreatment. after obtaining irb approval,the names and other identifying information of children in the original researchare matched against the state's child abuse registry, after permission to do so isobtained from state officials. this results in a large sample of children identifiedas having been abused or neglected when the original research was in progress.furthermore, the social service agencies for counties in the area are contactedand invited to participate in the research by sharing the child protective servicescase records of the identified children in the sample. based on these records, thetiming, type, chronicity, and severity of maltreatment is determined. carefulefforts are taken to ensure the confidentiality of all research materials.as a consequence, a uniquely informative investigation of the antecedents andcorrelates of child maltreatment using a prospective longitudinal design with alarge, representative sample results. matched subsamples of maltreated andnonmaltreated children are compared to address fundamental questions about theimpact of the experience of abuse or neglect, and its timing and severity, onvarious measures of psychosocial and emotional adjustment in childhood.a number of questions are raised by this case illustration that are alsorelevant to the protection of health services research data by minors: given the sensitive nature of the secondary analyses (and potentialperceptions of privacy invasion), were the researchers ethically obligated toseek permissionappendix c161protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.from families in the study when the investigation later turned to theprediction of child maltreatment? or did the original consent proceduresapply to the secondary data analysis that also involved accessing confidentialstate records? the initial use of parental passive consent proceduresšrather than activeconsent, in which the parent must contact the researchers to consentvolitionally after having been informed about the research purposesšalterthe ethical obligation to seek further consent after the research team began toinvestigate more sensitive issues? or were original consent proceduresadequate regardless of whether passive or active consent was used? because a significant proportion of the children originally enlisted into thestudy had reached the age of majority before the secondary analyses began,were the researchers ethically obligated to contact them for permission to usedata gathered during their minority? or were the original consentprocedures, involving parents but not children, still sufficient at this laterperiod? without opportunities for further informed consent, was it possible for theparticipant families or children (now, in some cases, young adults), toprotect themselves against the potential risks involved in the secondaryanalyses of these data in concert with protected (and confidential) staterecords?issues to considerthere are no easy answers to these questions, but posing them thoughtfullyis essential to consider judgments about how the needs and rights of minors canbe protected in health services research data that may be subjected to secondaryanalysis. there are additional considerations, discussed below, that add furthercomplexity to thinking about any potential special ethical review requirements ofresearch involving minors.children as a heterogeneous populationalthough the term ﬁchildrenﬂ is commonly used in these contexts to refer toall persons below the age of majority, it is instructive to realize that the termencompasses infants, preschoolers, gradeschool children, and adolescents within asingle conceptual umbrella. although the umbrella may be sufficient for legalpurposes, it illfits the heterogeneity of capabilities, interests, and needscharacterizing the population it covers.with respect to the reflective judgment required for informed consent, forexample, there is considerable research evidence that by early adolescence, youngpeople are capable of making informed consent decisions about medicaltreatment and research participation that are comparable in quality to those ofadults (abramovitch et al., 1995; abramovitch et al., 1991; lewis et al., 1978;melton et al., 1983; ruck et al., 1998; ruck et al., 1998; weithorn, 1982, 1983;weithorn and campbell, 1982). at somewhat earlier ages (i.e., during thegradeschool years), children's informed consent capabilities are more uneven orappendix c162protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.inconsistent, although their judgment can be strengthened through the use ofsimple interventions, such as providing short, educational information aboutrights and prerogatives as a research participant (abramovitch et al., 1995; rauand fisher, 1999). thus, the capacities of children to assert an active, responsiblevoice in judgments concerning their research participation increases significantlywith age, with mature competence reached well before the legal age of majority,but with the capacity for mature consent strengthened through ageappropriateeducational interventions.in a somewhat comparable manner, the psychological risks to which childrenare vulnerable also change significantly with age. moreover, these risks change incomplex ways: some decrease with increasing age, others increase as childrenmature, and still others remain essentially stable over the course of development(thompson, 1990a, b, 1992). this challenges the prevailing assumption thatchildren become less vulnerable in research contexts as they mature. forexample, although children become progressively less prone with increasing ageto becoming distressed, overwhelmed, or disorganized in research settingsbecause of the development of emotional and behavioral selfregulation andcoping skills, children become more susceptible to other risks from their researchparticipation as they mature. these include susceptibility to threats to selfconcept and selfesteem (sometimes arising from performance evaluation),;vulnerability to feelings of shame, embarrassment, or humiliation (sometimesfrom concerns about the improper disclosure of personal information); andconcern about expressed or implied social comparison evaluations. likewise,although children become progressively less prone to being deceived or coercedby research procedures as they develop more mature and insightful judgmentabout the motives of other people, they also become more vulnerable to concernabout perceived privacy violations in the use of their research data. indeed, formany adolescents, concerns with personal privacy extend to the disclosure ofpersonal information, such as their research data, even to parents (see wolfe,1978).there are several implications of this developmental analysis of researchrisk: the psychological risks associated with research participation and derivingfrom the imroper disclosure of research data vary as minors mature, but donot necessarily decrease linearly with increasing age. for some risks,vulnerability increases. moreover, children's vulnerability to the researchrisks most pertinent to adults increases sharply over time; these includeperceived violations of privacy, the embarrassment and humiliation that mayderive from inappropriate disclosure of personal health data, and some of thetangible consequences of unwarranted disclosure (e.g., difficult familyprocesses or compromised medical or legal circumstances; see below). estimating the nature of the research risks to which children are vulnerable isthus a developmentally graded assessment, and in longitudinal research theserisks may change as children mature over the course of the investigation. inother words, the research risks relevant to an investigation that wasinaugurated when children were preschoolers are not necessarily the same asthoseappendix c163protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.relevant by the time the same children have become adolescents. this meansthat a revised riskœbenefit calculus becomes necessary as longitudinalresearch proceeds (thompson, 1992). in the secondary analysis of data (as with longitudinal data), the constellationof risks to which children are vulnerable is also likely to change with thepassage of time since the original data were gathered. in addition, olderchildren and adolescents, like young adults, are likely to feel muchdifferently about the uses of data gathered when they were very young thanthey were capable of feeling at the time these data were initially obtained.concerns over personal privacy, threats of embarrassment or humiliation,and more tangible concerns related to the potentially inappropriate disclosureof research data now become personal issues (whereas formerly they wereaddressed on behalf of the child through parental proxy consent procedures).any assessment of the ethical responsibilities of researchers should takethese developmentally changing concerns into consideration.children as a uniquely vulnerable populationa longstanding tradition of special protections for children and youth inresearch derives from the special configuration of child, parental, and stateinterests related to children's research participation. within moral theory, theunique characteristics of children account for their limited selfdetermination andthe beneficent paternalism they receive from others (baumrind, 1978; melton,1987). their limited experience and immature reasoning capabilities togethermean that although children (as persons before the law) are entitled to some ofthe rights of privacy and selfdetermination granted to adults, their capacities toexercise these rights are limited. they are limited, in part, because of theresponsibilities entrusted to others to safeguard their welfare. as a consequence,adults (especially parents) make fundamental decisions concerning the researchparticipation of their offspring, exercising proxy consent on behalf of childrenand making other decisions concerning research on behalf of their children'sinterests. moreover, the state also assumes a special interest in the child's wellbeing, independently of the authority of parents, because of its responsibilityunder the parens patriae doctrine. this is one reason why the ethical review ofresearch protocols involving children by stateappointed agencies (e.g., irbs) istypically more searching, even though parents also exercise proxy consent onbehalf of their offspring.this means that children are almost uniquely powerless social actors indecisions concerning their research participation and the disposition of theirresearch materials. although children's assent is encouraged by existing federalregulations, it may be difficult for them to dissent meaningfully from researchparticipation not only because of limitations in judgment, but also because theirinvitation to participate typically occurs in a context of prior parental permission,institutional support (whether the institution is a school, childcare center,appendix c164protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.hospital, or other setting), and adults' interests in furthering the researchenterprise (abramovitch et al., 1991). for the same reasons, children's socialpower to resist research procedures that they find unduly distressing,psychologically invasive, or coercive may also be quite limited. furthermore,children experience limited social power not only over decisions concerning theirresearch participation but also over other elements of the research process, suchas the disclosure of research data and assurances concerning the disposition ofresearch materials, their withdrawal from research participation after the studyhas begun, and obtaining the benefits (if any) of research participation. each ofthese ordinary prerogatives of the research participant is exercised instead byadults as proxies for the child.of course, in most cases, adults (especially parents) make decisions in theinterests of children. however, it is unwise to assume that the interests of parentsand offspring are always identical in these situations and that the motivesunderlying parental consent are always consistent with children's interests.recognizing this, the federal regulations governing research with children(department of health and human services [dhhs], 1991) not only requirespecial review considerations in studies involving children, but also encouragethe child's assent to research participation when children are capable of doing someaningfully. (indeed, in 1978 the national commission for the protection ofhuman subjects of biomedical and behavioral research recommended that achild's objection to research participation constitute a binding restriction except inextraordinary circumstances and that the assent of children age 7 and older berequired for their research participation. these provisions were not, however,incorporated into the final dhhs regulations.) these provisions seem to reflectthe following: (1) children's unique needs and social vulnerability mandatespecial consideration in the ethical review of research, (2) adults (usually parents)must exercise proxy consent on behalf of children, but (3) proxy consent alonecannot be the only assurance that children are not subject to unreasonable risk.these provisions raise further the question of whether, when data gathered on anearlier occasion are enlisted later into new research purposes (e.g., secondary orlongitudinal analyses), children should be capable of making their own,independent decisions concerning access to and the disposition of their researchmaterials if they have developed sufficiently mature judgment to do so.problems in proxy consentjust as there is value in recognizing that parents usually make thoughtfuljudgments concerning the research participation of their offspring, there is valuealso in recognizing the circumstances in which proxy consent does not necessarilyprotect children's interests. when parents derive financial benefit, access toservices, or other personal rewards from the research participation of offspringfor example, proxy consent may not adequately protect children's interests.(indeed, philosopher paul ramsay, 1970, 1976, 1977 has argued that any nontherapeutic research with children is morally impermissible because evenappendix c165protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.proxy consent inevitably confounds adults' interests with those of children.) inabusive or adversarial parentœchild relationships, adults may be motivated to denypermission if children's research participation might contribute to the detection ofmaltreatment, substance abuse, or other parental problems. with respect tomedical research (e.g., phi), proxy consent by parents may be problematic insituations when biological assessments of offspring are needed to evaluate themedical condition of another family member (e.g., in genetic screening studies ordna analysis of tissue samples), or parents may be motivated to conduct riskassessment (presymptomatic) testing of offspring for disorders that are notimmediately relevant to the child's wellbeing (e.g., huntington's disease).potential problems in proxy consent are even more apparent when consent isgiven not by a biological parent, but by a representative of a government agencywhen children are wards of the state (see national bioethics advisorycommission, 1998). in these circumstances, inappropriate incentives may resultin considerable pressure for children to participate in research studies that maynot be in their best interests.in some situations, adolescents may be hesitant to obtain parental consentfor medical treatment of sensitive conditions (e.g., substance abuse or mentalhealth problems) because of privacy concerns. current legal policies in manystates recognize this in allowing adolescents to consent independently to certainforms of treatment without parental consent. this raises important issuesconcerning the confidentiality of medical records arising from treatment andadolescents' control over the disclosure of this information to family members andothers outside the family. likewise, behavioral researchers have long recognizedthat parental consent may be an impediment to research participation by olderchildren and adolescents in research studies of sensitive topics (e.g., sexuality,drug or alcohol use) in which parental consent is also likely to violate the privacyinterests of youth. in these circumstances, confidentiality and the control overaccess to research data must also be carefully considered.the potential problems of proxy consent are magnified somewhat by twoadditional considerations. first, consent also typically includes acceptingprovisions for and assurance of responsibility for many other aspects of researchparticipation in which parents and children's interests may not be identical. theseinclude, for example, provisions governing access to the research data gatheredfrom children, issues of privacy and confidentiality of research materials,children's knowledge of the results of the research inquiry, and conditionsgoverning children's elective withdrawal from research participation. in certainsituations, the decisions of parents may be influenced by factors different fromthose relevant to children's needs and interests.second, consent is often assumed to endure for the duration of the researchinvestigation. as noted earlier, this may be problematic in longitudinal studies orin the secondary analysis of original data that occurs at which children havematured to an age when their own independent judgments concerning thedisposition of their research data are relevant. children's independent consent isimportantappendix c166protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not only to respect their increasing maturity concerning judgments about researchparticipation (and their rights as research participants), but to enable themindependently to protect their prerogatives as research participants byparticipating in a consent process in which provisions about confidentiality andprivacy, risks and benefits, freedom to withdraw and access to research findingsare discussed.in light of these considerations, it becomes apparent also why many researchscientists believe that passive consent procedures are inappropriate to researchinvolving children (e.g., fisher, 1993). in passive consent, parents receive noticeof a research study in which their children will participate unless the parentcontacts the investigator to prohibit participation. by contrast, active consentprocedures require the parent's volitional consent before children can participatein research. the fundamental problem with passive consent procedures is theassumption that parents who do not respond have assented to researchparticipation when, in fact, they may have failed to receive relevant information,it may have been lost or misplaced after it was received, or parents may haveotherwise neglected to indicate their objections to their child's researchinvolvement. passive consent is also problematic because entailed in the consentprocess is the acceptance of many other provisions governing researchparticipation (e.g., provisions concerning disclosure, confidentiality, andprotection of research data; conditions governing children's withdrawal fromresearch participation; assurances concerning risks and benefits from researchinvolvement; and guarantees concerning penalties owing to the failure toparticipate in research) for which active, not passive, consent is necessary. activeconsent is especially important in situations where parents are acting as proxies inprotecting their children's needs and interests.for similar reasons, blanket research consent provisions incorporated intoinsurance and consenttotreatment documents that permit phi (and, quite often,the phi of family members) to be used for secondary research purposes may beequally inappropriate from the perspective of research ethics. without clearinformation concerning the nature of the secondary research purposes andrelevant assurances concerning privacy and confidentiality, it is difficult for anindividual to know what he or she is consenting to. moreover, when such blanketconsent is requested at the time of medical treatment, these circumstances maymake it very difficult to decline.special considerations in biomedical datathe need for parental proxy consent and children's assent, thedevelopmentally graded risks faced by children owing to the inappropriatedisclosure of research data, and the growing capacities for personally informedconsent that emerge as minors mature are considerations shared by behavioral andbiomedical researchers who enlist children into their studies. there are, however,a number of concerns that are more specific to health services research data, suchas those used for secondary research purposes, because of the broaderimplicationsappendix c167protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of the data for children and their families (see, generally, national bioethicsadvisory commission, 1999). these make considerations associated with thecontrol and dissemination of phi especially germane, particularly when data arecollected and/or used by agencies not usually governed by the common rule.these issues can be illustrated by considering the genetic testing of children andadolescents.with the recent significant advances in knowledge generated by the humangenome project, the challenges posed by the uses and potential misuses ofpersonal genetic information have received increased attention. genetic testing ofchildren and youth can occur for many reasons, as in genetic screening orpedigree analyses (e.g., to trace the family history of a disease) or in dnaanalysis of tissue samples for research or therapeutic purposes. as knowledge ofthe human genome increases, it is likely that genetic testing of children willincrease in the years to come. whatever the reasons that testing initially occurs,genetic testing may yield information of a sensitive nature for children andadolescents, such as the discovery of an inherited vulnerability, possibly for astigmatizing (e.g., mental illness, alcoholism) or lifethreatening disease (e.g.,huntington's disease, cancer).there are immediate and longterm implications of the knowledge yieldedby genetic testing of children and adolescents that are directly relevant to thedissemination and confidentiality of the results of their testing. in the immediatecontext, knowledge of inherited vulnerabilities can be distressing and confusing,especially given the uncertain, probabilistic prognostic implications of thisinformation (indeed, most adults are unlikely to grasp the indeterminateimplications of a genetic marker for an inherited disorder). this requires sensitiveconsiderations of whether children and youth are permitted access to their testingresults, conditions under which this information is provided, and the availabilityof support and guidance to help ensure that youth respond constructively (e.g., byenlisting pathologypreventive behavioral practices, if possible) rather thannonconstructively (e.g., through personally abusive practices or the developmentof depressive or anxious pathology) to the news that they have an inheritedvulnerability (gardner et al., 1992). this might involve enlisting a fellow healthcare professional, a trusted extended family member, or an adult friend, to discussdistressing health care findings with an adolescent when immediate familymembers may not be the most suitable counselors, perhaps because of their ownconflicts or interest or owing to family dissension.these considerations lead to a series of important questions. who else isallowed access to the information yielded by a child's or an adolescent's genetictesting? who decides if, when, and how the young person is provided with thisknowledge? to what extent are the youth's preferences to knowšor not knowšthe results of the test determinative at the time the testing is conducted or in thefuture? to what extent does a child or adolescent have control over whether thisinformation is shared with family members or with others outside the family?there is value in creative avenues for protecting children while also ensuring thattheir privacy and selfdetermination are safeguarded. one researchappendix c168protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.team, for example, protected adolescents' ﬁright not to knowﬂ the results ofgenetic test for huntington's disease, but also put the testing results in a registry towhich youth would have direct and exclusive access after age 18 (see fisher etal., 1996).these questions are important because of their relevance to the potentialextended implications of the information yielded by genetic testing. in a longtermcontext, knowledge of inherited vulnerabilities can have implications foremployment, insurability, and health care coverage that may be based on anaccurate or inaccurate understanding of the broader implications of markerswithin the genotype for inherited disorders. this raises similar questions aboutthe control of the information yielded by a young person's genetic testing and theimportance of guarding against the risks inherent in the unwarranted (andunwanted) disclosure of personal health information such as this, especially forinstitutions not typically governed by the common rule. importantly, phiimproperly disseminated during a child's minority can have longertermimplications for that person's wellbeing after he or she has become an adult.the secondary analysis of health care data adds further questions to these.this arises, in part, because as children mature to majority age, they may beentitled to an active role in decisions concerning the use of their original testingresults. furthermore, the interests that governed initial parental proxy consent togenetic testing may be much different from those governing the young adult'spersonal concerns about the dissemination of this information. this suggests thatprocedures governing the uses of phi obtained from minors must be consideredwithin a lifespan context for the individual. the consent processes andassurances that occurred at the time a child was initially tested may not generalizeto later conditions in which the adolescent or young adult can better represent heror his own interests and preferences, and may have an interest in doing so.conclusionsa central challenge in considering the ethics of research with children is thejuxtaposition of the interests of children, their parents, and the researchcommunity within the context of children's limited decisionmaking capabilitiesand our cultural commitment to beneficent paternalism on their behalf (e.g.,koocher and keithspiegel, 1990). when considering how best to protect thehealth services research data of minors, especially in the context of the secondaryanalysis of these data, the issues become especially complex because of thechanging developmental needs and interests of minors over the course of theinvestigation, which may be very different at the time of the secondary analysisof data than they were at the time the data were originally gathered (and consentprocedures were originally instituted). these problems are encountered, insomewhat different ways, by behavioral researchers who conduct longitudinalstudies in which children's involvement in research is maintained through theirincreasingly active participation in decisionmaking on their behalf as theymature. in biomedical research most relevant to phi, however, the challenges areappendix c169protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.additionally complicated because family needs can be confounded with children'sneeds, the dissemination of children's phi can create family conflict, health careinstitutions may or may not be governed by traditional procedures associated withprotection from research risks, and the inappropriate disclosure of children's phican have lifelong implications for children that affect them well after they havereached the age of majority.with respect to the practices of irbs in their review of research protocolsinvolving children, several kinds of questions are warranted. do research procedures undergo a more searching examination when childrenare research participants, particularly with respect to assessing in adevelopmentally graded manner the potential risks of their researchparticipation? irbs assume a special responsibility to children as researchparticipants and cannot assume that parental proxy consent will alwayssafeguard children's interests. are active parental consent procedures used when children are below the ageof majority? are consent procedures sufficiently specific and clear thatparents can make reasonable judgments concerning the nature of the researchprocedures and the uses of research data? do research procedures provide for children's assent to research participationindependent of parental consent? are these procedures appropriate to thechild's age and conducted in a manner that avoids undue incentives orpressure on the child? do these procedures attempt to provide information tochildren, suitable to their understanding of their rights concerning the privacyand confidentiality of the information yielded by research, their freedom towithdraw from participation, and related prerogatives? (some irbs requiredocumentation of the proportion of children who do not assent to researchprocedures and who seek to withdraw from participation once the researchhas begun.) with older children and adolescents, do research procedures provide for theiractive participation in the process of research consent, recognizing thematurity of their independent judgment? when research is longitudinal in nature or when secondary analyses ofpreviously collected data are conducted, is a followup irb review needed todetermine whether additional consent procedures are required from thechildren who participated in the original research or from their parents? arethere new dimensions of potential research risk arising from the fact that thechildren are now older or from changes in research purposes or goals? when sensitive data (e.g., the results of biomedical assessments) areobtained, is thoughtful consideration devoted to questions such as (1) whohas access to this information, (2) whether, and under what circumstances,the child or adolescent is informed about testing results; and (3) provisionsfor the child to obtain direct access to this information, and control over itsdissemination, after reaching the age of majority?as a general rule, it is valuable to consider the protection of health servicesresearch data for minors within a lifespan context, taking into consideration theappendix c170protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.longerterm implications of decisions made early on behalf of the child, as wellas the child's own preferences and goals (fisher, 1997). procedures that respectchildren's immediate and longterm interests in the privacy, confidentiality, andprotection of their phi, in the context of respecting their rights to ageappropriateselfdetermination, are especially warranted.referencesabramovitch, r., freedman, j. l., henry, k., and van brunschot, m. (1995). children's capacity toagree to psychological research: knowledge of risks and benefits and voluntaries. ethics andbehavior,  5, 25œ48.abramovitch, r., freedman, j. l., thoden, k., and nikolich, c. (1991). children's capacity toconsent to participation in psychological research: empirical findings. child development, 62, 1100œ1109.baumrind, d. (1978). reciprocal rights and responsibilities in parentœchild relations. journal ofsocial issues, 34, 179œ196.department of health and human services (dhhs) (1991). code of federal regulations. protectionof human subjects. 45 cfr 46, subparts a and d. washington, dc: u.s.governmentprinting office.fisher, c. b. (1993). integrating science and ethics in research with high risk children and youth.social policy report of the society for research in child development, 7, 1œ27.fisher, c. b. (1997). a relational perspective on ethicsinscience decisionmaking for research withvulnerable populations. irb: a review of human subjects research, 19, 1œ4.fisher, c. b., hoagwood, k., and jensen, p. s. (1996). casebook on ethical issues in research withchildren and adolescents with mental disorders. in k. hoagwood, p. s. jensen, and c. b.fisher (eds.), ethical issues in mental health research with children and adolescents. pp.135œ266. mahwah, nj: erlbaum.gardner, w., thompson, r. a., and smith, m. g. (1992, april). genetic counseling about risks ofchronic diseases: developmental perspectives on adolescents' best interests and legalrights. in e. j. susman (chair), ethical issues and the adolescent: research, health care,and social policy. symposium conducted at the meeting of the society for research onadolescence, new orleans, la.koocher, g. p., and keithspiegel, p. c. (1990). children, ethics, and the law. lincoln, ne:university of nebraska press.lewis, c. e., lewis, m. a., and ifekwunigue, m. (1978). informed consent by children andparticipation in an influenza vaccine trial. american journal of public health, 68, 1079œ1082.melton, g. b. (1987). the clashing of symbols: prelude to child and family policy. americanpsychologist, 42, 345œ354.melton, g. b., koocher, g. p., and saks, m. j. (eds.) (1983). children's competence to consent. newyork: plenum.national bioethics advisory commission (1998). research involving persons with mental disordersthat may affect decisionmaking capacity. rockville, md.national bioethics advisory commission (1999). research involving human biological materials:ethical issues and policy guidance. vol. 1. report and recommendations of the nationalbioethics advisory commission. rockville, md.ramsay, p. (1970). the patient as person. new haven: yale university press.appendix c171protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ramsay, p. (1976). the enforcement of morals: nontherapeutic research on children. hastings centerreport, august, 21œ30.ramsay, p. (1977). children as research subjects: a reply. hastings center report, april, 40œ42.rau, j.m. b., and fisher, c. b. (1999). assessing and enhancing the research consent capacity ofchildren and youth. unpublished manuscript, department of psychology, fordhamuniversity, new york.ruck, m. d., abramovitch, r., and keating, d.p. (1998 a). children's and adolescents' understandingof rights: balancing nurturance and selfdetermination. child development, 64, 404œ417.ruck, m. d., keating, d. p., abramovitch, r., and koegl, c. j. (1998 b). adolescents' and children'sknowledge about rights: some evidence for how young people view rights in their ownlives. journal of adolescence, 21, 275œ289.thompson, r. a. (1990a). vulnerability in research: a developmental perspective on research risk.child development, 61, 1œ16.thompson, r. a. (1990b). behavioral research involving children: a developmental perspective onrisk. irb: a review of human subjects research, 12, 1œ6.thompson, r. a. (1992). developmental changes in research risk and benefit: a changing calculus ofconcerns. b. stanley and j. e. sieber (eds.), social research on children and adolescents:ethical issues. (pp. 31œ64) . newbury park, ca: sage.weithorn, l. a. (1982). developmental factors and competence to make informed treatmentdecisions. pp. 85œ100 g. b. melton, legal reforms affecting child and youth services newyork: haworth.weithorn, l. a. (1983). children's capacities to decide about participation in research. irb: a reviewof human subjects research, 5, 1œ5.weithorn, l. a., and campbell, s. b. (1982). the competency of children and adolescents to makeinformed consent treatment decisions. child development, 53, 1589œ1598.wolfe, m. (1978). childhood and privacy. pp. 175œ222 i. altman and j. f. wohlwill (eds.), childrenand the environment. new york: plenum.appendix c172protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix dconfidentiality of health information:international comparative approachesbartha maria knoppers, j.d.although the concept of the confidentiality of personal medical data is wellaccepted by the general public and by health professionals, the detailed practiceis under potentially serious attack by governments that want access in order tocombat fraud or serious crime or to improve efficiency of services, by bigbusiness that wishes to improve its competitive edge or reduce its costs byutilizing detailed personal data in order to focus the promotion of its productsand services, and by health care organizations that do not keep their securitymeasures up to the state of the art required by the information processingfacilities available and the attacks on personal medical data.1a brief comparative overview of international and national developments onthe confidentiality of health information over the last half century must of needscover (1) the right of privacy, (2) medical confidentiality per se, and (3) theprotection of personal data. together they overlap and sometimes commingle.whether understood as a property or liberty interest,2 privacy continues todevelop the zone of personal intimacy free from public scrutiny. medicalconfidentiality arises from both the nature of the information concerned and thefiduciary character of the physician/patient relationship. it has seen a movementtowards greater patient as opposed to professional control of health information.finally, the recent appearance of personal data protection laws not only shieldsthe individual from the powers of informatics but also provides a measure ofsecurity and personal control. privacy, confidentiality, and personal dataprotection are inseparable when touching upon health information.internationalin 1948, the united nations adopted article 12 of the universaldeclaration, which upholds the protection against ﬁarbitrary interference with[one's] privacy, family, home or correspondenceﬂ and ﬁattacks upon [one's] honorand1barber, b., ﬁpatient data and security: an overviewﬂ (1998) 49 international journalof medical informatics, 19 at 25.2le bris, s., and b.m. knoppers, ﬁinternational and comparative concepts of privacyﬂin rothstein, m. (ed.) genetic secrets new haven: yale university press, (1997) 418œ448.appendix d173protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reputation.ﬂ this same right is also found in the 1955 european convention onhuman rights, although the possibility of state ﬁinterferenceﬂ... ﬂfor theprotection of healthﬂ was specifically foreseen as a possible exception. althoughthe right to privacy was further strengthened by its inclusion in the 1976 unitednations international covenant on civil and political rights, it was both thecouncil of europe's 1981 convention for the protection of individuals withregard to the automatic processing of data which considered health data asﬁspecialﬂ, and the organization for economic cooperation and development(oecd's) 1989 guidelines for the protection of privacy and transborderflows that established the modern parameters for the principled regulation andsecurity of medical data. the eight oecd principles are: (1) collectionlimitation; (2) data quality; (3) purpose specification; (4) use limitation; (5)security safeguards; (6) openness; (7) individual participation; and (8)accountability. the 1981 convention, in particular, established exceptions fordata banks for statistics or scientific research purposes as well as the rules forrecord linkage.the last decade has also witnessed an increasing emphasis on patientautonomy and patient's rights. thus, according to the world health organization,all health status information should remain confidential even after death (art.4.1), declaration on the promotion of patient's rights in europe). concurrentwith this expanding ambit of confidentiality is that of the notion of identifiabilitythrough personal data. the 1995 european community directive on theprotection of individuals (with regard to the processing of personal data and onthe free movement of such data) defines personal data as ﬁany informationrelating to an individual or identifiable natural person ﬁ(data subject); anidentifiable person is one who can be ﬁidentified, directly or indirectly, inparticular by reference to an identification number or to one or more factorsspecific to his physical, physiological, mental, economic, cultural or socialidentity.ﬂ (art. 2.a).it was however, the 1997 council of europe's convention on human rightsand biomedicine that included a new corollary right: ﬁthe right not to be informedabout health informationﬂ within the concept of respect for private life and theright to information. in a sense, privacy in the health sector once associated withthe property of medical records, then as a right of ﬁsecrecyﬂ (i.e., not to bepersonally identified or ﬁprocessedﬂ without consent), has now been extended tocover the sphere of personal intimacy through not being informed of one's ownhealth data.in that same year, the council of europe also adopted recommendation r97(5) on the protection of medical data. three articles bear mention here:article 1. an individual shall not be regarded as ‚identifiable' if identificationrequires an unreasonable amount of time and manpower.article 3.1. the respect of rights and fundamental freedoms, and in particular ofthe right to privacy, shall be guaranteed during the collection and processing ofmedical data.appendix d174protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.article 7.2. in particular, unless other appropriate safeguards are provided bydomestic law, medical data may only be communicated to a person who issubject to the rules of confidentiality incumbent upon a health care professional,or to comparable rules of confidentiality, and who complies with the provisionsof this recommendation.the status of a council of europe's convention is that of an internationaltreaty, and it is binding on signatory states. the first article cited above againtakes up the challenge of defining identifiability in a computerized society, thusadding the proviso ﬁrequiring an unreasonable amount of time and manpower.ﬂthe second makes explicit the link between privacy and medical data (whichaccording to another article includes genetic data). the third limits the personswho can receive such data to health professionals or those ﬁwith comparable rulesof confidentiality.ﬂ this latter requirement resonates with the ﬁextraterritorialityﬂapproach of the 1995 european community directive mentioned earlier, which isbinding on countries within the european union (eu).according to the directive, not only must all 15 member states establishlegislation that conforms with its standards, but personal data cannot betransferred from an eu country to a noneu recipient country unless theprotections in the recipient country are deemed to afford ﬁadequate levels ofprotectionﬂ (art. 25.1).the processing of health data is not distinguished from that of otherpersonal data but the exemptions provided for under article 8 are certainlyrelevant:where processing of the data is required for the purposes of preventivemedicine, medical diagnosis, the provision of care or treatment or themanagement of health care services, and where those data are processed by ahealth professional subject under national law or rules established by nationalcompetent bodies subject to the obligation of professional secrecy or by anotherperson also subject to an equivalent obligation of secrecy.finally in 1999, the european group on ethics in science and newtechnologies issued an opinion ﬁethical issues of health care in the informationsociety.ﬂ3 not only are the eight principles broader than the oecd dataprinciples, but participation and education have been added to the traditional list.the group calls for a clear statement on rights and duties related to personalhealth data in the information society at a european level. indeed, the opinionasserts that1. a directive on medical data protection is desirable within the frameworkof the current data protection directive to address particular issues arisingfrom the use of health data;2. a european patient's charter covering the above aspects, possibly bymeans of a recommendation, should be adopted.3the principles are (1) privacy, (20) confidentiality, (3) principle of ﬁlegitimatepurpose,ﬂ(4) consent, (5) security, (6) transparency, (7) participation, and (8) education.appendix d175protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in short, there are four wellestablished core information principlesconcerning personal data protection in europe: 1) statutory protection; 2)transparent processing; 3) special protection for sensitive data, and, 4)enforcement rights for individuals. nevertheless, a recent study for the oecd onﬁdata protection in transborder flows of health research data,ﬂ whilesupportive of selfregulatory codes of conduct (especially where there is scrutinyby a data protection authority and eligibility for funding), emphasizes the needfor more consolidation.4 within the area of sensitive data, health information isincreasingly being singled out as being in need of specific statutory protection inspite of the application of the four core principles through a web of legalinstruments. nowhere is this trend more evident however than in nationallegislation.nationalunited kingdomin the united kingdom (uk), confidentiality is afforded both common lawand statutory protection. beginning with the common law, ﬁ[i]t is generallythought that the action of breach of confidence is now a sui generis action findingits roots in principle of equity, contract, property and tortﬂ kennedy and grubb,1998; (p. 497),). the obligation of confidence arises both from the context inwhich the information is communicated to the doctor and from the nature of thatrelationship. furthermore, ﬁimportant public interests favor confidentiality wherepersonal information is communicated in circumstances in which it is clear thatthe recipient is expected to respect the privacy of that informationﬂ (p. 502). inorder to succeed in an action for breach of confidentiality, a plaintiff would haveto show some form of injury (including mental distress) or economic loss (p.514). finally, contrary to civil law, a physician may disclose confidentialinformation in the courtroom due to the public interest in the administration ofjustice, with the possibility that refusal could be considered contempt of court.common law may be modified by statute. for example, the data protectionact of 1998 includes in its core principles the duty to process fairly and lawfullypersonal data. sensitive data, defined as including health data, cannot beprocessed in the absence of explicit consent unless they are necessary for medicalpurposes or ﬁundertaken by a professional who in the circumstances owes a dutyof confidentiality which is equivalent to that which would arise if that personwere a health professionalﬂ (schedule 3, sec. 8).it should be noted that the human rights act (1998) incorporates theeuropean convention on human rights into uk law. this guarantees the right to4organization for economic cooperation and development, data protection intransborder flows of health research data (sti: health policy brief) 1999, at p.23; seealso schwartz, p. ﬁeuropean data protection law and medical privacyﬂ in rothstein, m.(ed.), supra, note 2, 392œ417.appendix d176protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.respect for privacy and family life. superimposed on this, the previouslymentioned data protection act of 1998 provides a framework of rights andprinciples governing the use of electronic or structured paper records, includingfair processing. nevertheless, in spite of the core principles found therein, the lawdoes not specify when confidential information should and should not bedisclosed to others, in research or most other activities. thus, decisions must bemade according to common law on a casebycase basis even when a researchproject has been approved by a research ethics committee and authorized by ahealth authority.5it also bears noting that in 1999, the british medical association (bma)reiterated its request for statutory intervention to clarify the law in respect of theconfidentiality of medical information in both the private and the state sector.6the general principles put forward by the bma follow: information disclosed should be the minimum necessary to achieve theobjective and, whenever possible, anonymous. patients should be made aware of the potential uses of their information andbe given an opportunity to object. use of information for research iscurrently accepted as long as it is carried out within the guidelines andsubject to monitoring by appropriately constituted research ethicscommittees. the bma strongly recommends that patients be made awarethat research is carried out and that it may involve the use of their recordsunless they object.generally, the association maintains that although research constitutes ajustifiable use of personal health information, ideally it should use anonymizeddata wherever possible. the information disclosed should be the minimumnecessary to achieve the objective. it may be possible to use pseudonyms or othertracking mechanisms for information, which cannot be anonymized, thus ensuringaccuracy and minimizing the use of personal identifiers. health professionalsmust make reasonable efforts to ensure patients understand that their data may beused in research unless they exercise their right to object. identifiable informationshould not be used for research purposes if the individual has5medical research council, personal information in medical research (guidelines),1999, (s.2.2.5).6british medical association, confidentiality and disclosure of health information, oct. 14, 1999: confidentiality: the principle of keeping secure and secret from others,information given by or about an individual in the course of a professional relationship.disclosure: the revealing of identifiable health information to anyone other than thesubject. personal health information: any personal information relating to the physical ormental health of any person from which that person can be identified. anonymizedinformation: information, which does not, directly or indirectly, identify the person towhom it relates.appendix d177protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.registered an objection. nor should the contact details of potential participants inresearch be passed to researchers without consent.moreover, in these recent guidelines, the bma has taken the explicitposition that ﬁit is not ethically necessary to seek consent to the use ofanonymous information.ﬂ it also maintained the position that in addition to thetraditional duty of medical secrecy, ﬁthere is also strong public interest inmaintaining confidentiality so that individuals will be encouraged to seekappropriate treatment and share information relevant to it.ﬂ these recentguidelines repeated the concern already addressed in the 1997 caldicott reportover the management and security of flows of information through newcommunication technologies. in short, the bma maintains that the dataprotection act of 1998 cannot adequately protect medical information.recently, the medical research council key principle b maintained:when consent is impracticable, confidential information can be disclosed formedical research without consent if it is justified by the importance of the study;if there is no intention to contact individuals (except to seek consent) or revealfindings to them, if there are no practicable alternatives of equal effectiveness;and if the infringement of confidentiality is kept to a minimum7with regard to this principle, the document notes that the ﬁdecision aboutwhether a study is sufficiently important is not for the investigator alone, butmust also be referred to a local research ethics committee for independentassessment.ﬂ the techniques required for the use of personal health informationin research are encoding or anonymization ﬁso far as is reasonably possible.ﬂanonymized data is understood as the equivalent of unidentifiable data, that are,all information that could directly identify individuals has been irreversiblyremoved.a recent case of the court of appeal (december 21,1999)8 reversed a highcourt ruling9 that the collection and sale of data on doctors' prescribing habitsbreached confidentiality even when the data are anonymized. the case hinged onthe issue of implied consent to the use of anonymized data ﬁnot only bycommercial companies but for public interest purposes, including medicalresearch and statistics.ﬂ10the court of appeal held that for breach of confidence to occur theinformation must have: ﬁthe necessary quality of confidence about it; be impartedin circumstances imparting an obligation of confidence; and, be an unauthorizedused of that information to the detriment of the party communicating it.ﬂ thecourt of appeal held that due to anonymization ﬁ[t]he patient's privacy will havebeen safeguarded, not invaded. the pharmacist's duty of confidence will7supra, note 5.8source informatics limited, http://wood.ccta.gov.uk/courtser/judgeme.9r and the department of health (ex parte) v. source informatics [1999] all e r 185.10dyer, c., ﬁbma's patient confidentiality rules are deemed unlawfulﬂ (1999) 319bmj 1221.appendix d178protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.not have been breached.ﬂ it is interesting to note that albeit in obiter, the court ofappeal suggested that such anonymized data would also not run afoul of articles2(b) and 8 of the european directive of 1995.australiaﬁthe law relating to privacy in australia is unsatisfactory. there is nogeneral common law or statutory right to privacy. such general privacy laws asexist have developed in a piecemeal fashion.ﬂ11in australia, as in the united kingdom, medical practitioners have noprofessional privilege.12 furthermore, any breach of confidence by a generalpractitioner may lead to disciplinary offenses or to civil actions rising out of tort,contract, or equity. there are also statutory provisions and guidelines imposingthe requirements of confidentiality, including circumstances that constituteexceptions to confidentiality. an interesting position is that medical records arethe property of the private medical practitioner who can allow or deny access(except for the australian capitol territory).13 the same does not hold for publichealth facilities.the commonwealth privacy act 1988 applies to research on personalinformation held by a commonwealth agency. it establishes the fundamentalprinciple related to data protection, including special provisions related to the useof identifiable personal information in medical research.14 the guidelines for theprotection of privacy in the conduct of medical research of the national healthand medical research council (1998) not only require that each research projectbe approved by an institutional ethics committee but also require the following:2.3 the written protocol for the conduct of each medical research project shouldstate:(d) the reasons why personal rather than deidentified information is needed;(e) why consent to the use of personal information cannot be obtained from theindividuals involved;(j) the safeguards that will be applied to protect personal information that will bemade available to other researchers or third parties.11chalmers, d., ﬁaustralia,ﬂ in nys herman, (ed.) international encyclopedia of laws:medical law, vol. 1 (boston: kluwer law international, 1998) 1 at p. 79.12ibid. at p. 77: ﬁ in victoria, tasmania and the northern territory there is a privilegecontained in the relevant state legislation which allows a doctor to refuse to divulgeconfidential information in court proceedings unless the patient consents to thedisclosure.ﬂ13breen v. williams (1996) 70 aljr 772.14excludes states and local government, as well as private agencies.appendix d179protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.furthermore, the institutional ethics committee must weigh the publicinterest in medical research against the public interest in privacy (art. 3.2). ifpublic interest in research substantially outweighs its interest in privacy, then theresearch will not be considered a breach of the privacy act.francearticle 9 of the french civil code proclaims the right to privacy. protectionof health information, however, stems chiefly from the penal code (art. 22613and 14). this means that the sanction for breach is a criminal one, the informationtransmitted by the patient being of a highly personal nature (intuitu personae).furthermore, whereas most obligations of a physician are what are known as ﬁanobligation of meansﬂ, medical secrecy is one of result. this is important since theambit of the medical secret extends beyond what is heard, observed, or confidedto what is understood. thus, simple proof of breach is sufficient to constitute afault.15 according to the 1978 law on informatics, records and freedoms everyperson has the right to object to the collection and storage of personal data and toaccess to such data.in a major statutory amendment in 1994 to the french omnibus dataprotection law,16 french legislators set out restrictions on the automatic treatmentof personal information for the purpose of health care research. this statute setsup a new body of data protection oversight, establishes substantive principles fordata protection in medical research, and specifies important individual intereststhat must be respected before personal information can be used in a health careresearch project.ﬂ each request to process information for medical research is tobe submitted first to the consultative committee on the treatment of informationin research health care sector of experts, who are then to notify the nationalcommission on information and liberties (cnil).17in 1995, the revised code of ethics for physicians increased the number ofarticles treating medical secrecy with reference to the additional conditionsestablished by law for the protection of personal information. disciplinarysanctions are independent of any civil or penal ones. finally, specific laws governnot only the computerization of medical data, but also the gradual introduction ofthe smart card in the healthcare system.in addition to setting up a new body of oversight, the 1994 amendmentestablishes important individual interests. most important is a generalrequirement that personal medical information that permits the identification ofindividuals be encoded before transmission to a research project. although thereare exceptions,15see generally, gérard m., in international encyclopedia of laws: medical law,ﬁfrance,ﬂ supra, note 11, pp. 1œ160, at 138œ146.16computerized processing of namelinked data for the purpose of research in thehealth sector. law no. 94548.17schwartz p. m., ﬁeuropean data protection law and medical privacyﬂ at pp. 403œ404in genetic secrets, rothstein, m., (ed.), supra, note 2, 1997.appendix d180protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the law forbids the reporting of research results that permit the direct or indirectidentification of concerned parties. the law also grants individuals a right toobject to use of their data in any medical research project. finally, treatment ofone's health care information in a research project generally requires theindividual to be personally informed of the nature of the transmitted data and hisor her right to access and correct the information the intended recipient of theinformation and the end use (finalité) of the information.18in france, the consultative committee on the treatment of information inresearch and health care is empowered by cnil to receive requests fromresearchers to use nominative information without consent, firstly, if notificationof the change of recipient of nominative information would be impracticable;second, if the information is unknown to the person, and third, where theinformation concerns a required notifiable condition. the only restriction is thatthe data be coded.19in 1997, the cnil adopted recommendation 97008 on the treatment ofpersonal health data. this recommendation reiterates the obligation to maintainconfidentiality, and to inform the person of any transmission of information withthe possibility of objection and, finally, requires the anonymization of data forany secondary uses. where information systems involve ongoing followup andupdating, coding, encryption, or scrambling of the information is recommended.in addition, adopting heightened security measures for medical data, the cnilcan at any time verify the respect of these conditions. yet, the commissionaffirmed that in conformity with article 5 of the 1981 convention on theautomatic processing of data access to nominative medical data for properfollowup and the inclusion of such data for purposes of state social securityprograms, for prevention strategies, or for statistics or research were notprecluded provided there is coding or anonymization.canadamost canadian jurisdictions have some form of privacy legislation in place,either as part of freedomofinformation and protectionofprivacy legislation oras a separate statute. however, in response to international developments (e.g.,the 1995 european directive) and to increasing public awareness and concern,there have been recent developments in two main areas: the expansion oflegislative protection of personal information to include the private sector and thedevelopment of comprehensive legislation specific to health information. thefederal bill c6 (formerly c54)20 is an example of the first; new healthinformation legislation in manitoba, saskatchewan, and alberta, and draftlegislation in ontario, are examples of the second.18schwartz, ibid. at p. 404.19art. 403, al. 2 of d. no. 95682, 9 mai 1995, jo 11 mai.20bill c6, personal information protection and electronic documents act, 2nd sess.,36th parl., 1999, part 1.appendix d181protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the success of the canada health infoway and similar projects under way atthe national and provincial levels will depend on the development of acomprehensive and consistent legislative framework for the protection ofpersonal health information. the final report of the advisory council on healthinfrastructure noted that ﬂa real danger exists that canada could end up withmany different approaches to privacy and the protection of personal healthinformationﬁ and recommended that harmonization of provincial and federalapproaches be encouraged and that ﬂall governments in canada should ensurethat they have legislation to address privacy protection specifically aimed atprotecting personal health information through explicit and transparentmechanisms.ﬂ21 in addition, it recommended that privacy legislation applicable tohealth information bind the public and private sectors.22the legislative renewal program within health protection branch transitionis another relevant part of the current legal context. the review and proposed newlegislation include delineation of roles and responsibilities, division of powers,risk management, scientific freedom, and safeguards for confidentiality andprivacy.23there is no discrete common law action for breach of privacy in canada.24privacy is protected by a network of legislation, constitutional provisions, andvarious aspects of common law. health care providers have an obligation tomaintain the confidentiality of patient information as part of their duties of careand fiduciary duties.25 a breach of privacy may also be grounds for other typesof tort actions such as nuisance, trespass, libel, slander, defamation, assault, orbattery.26 if there is a contractual relationship between the provider and thepatient, a duty of confidence may be considered to be implied in the contract.in a recent case involving counselling records, the supreme court of canadaconfirmed that section 8 of the canadian charter of rights and freedomsprovides protection for such confidential information and indirectly for thetherapeutic relationship.27 in another case under the charter, where a bodysample taken without consent or for medical purposes was used in criminalproceedings,21advisory council on health infrastructure, canada health infoway: paths to betterhealth, final report (health canada reports, february 1999), chapter 1 at 5.2, 5.3.22ibid. at 53.23health canada, shared responsibilities, shared vision: renewing the federal healthprotection legislation (discussion paper) (ottawa: health canada, 1998) at 35œ36; healthcanada, national consultations summary report: renewal of the federal healthprotection legislation (ottawa: health canada, 1999).24for a review of canadian law relating to health information and privacy, see marshallm. and b. von tigerstrom, ﬁconfidentiality and disclosure of health informationﬂ indownie j. and caulfield t. (eds.), canadian health law and policy (toronto:butterworths, 1999) 143.25mcinerney v. macdonald, [1992] 2 s.c.r. 138.26fridman, g.h.l., the law of torts in canada, vol. 2 (toronto: carswell, 1990) at192ff; klar, l.n., tort law, 2d ed. (toronto: carswell, 1996) at 66œ67.27r. v. mills [1999] s.c.j. no. 68 (ql) at para. 79œ82.appendix d182protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the court held that the individual had a reasonable expectation of privacy in partbecause of the relationship of confidence with the health care provider.28quebecalthough not a legally recognized ﬁstate,ﬂ the province of quebec waschosen as an example of a comprehensive multilayered approach to theconfidentiality of medical data within canada. examining the normativeinstruments according to their legal hierarchy, we have seen that the canadiancharter of rights and freedoms contains no explicit right to privacy but has beeninterpreted as both a liberty interest (art. 7) and a right to be free fromﬁunreasonable search and seizureﬂ (art. 8).in addition to the canadian charter, which serves as the ultimate filter of theconstitutionality of all provincial and federal legislation, quebec has its owncharter. this charter of human rights and freedoms, which is of a quasiconstitutional nature, contains a right to respect for private life (art. 5) and moreimportantly the ﬁright to nondisclosure of confidential informationﬂ even in acourt of law, absent patient or statutory authorization (art. 9).these provisions are buttressed by the civil code of quebec, which since1994 had a whole chapter with explicit provisions on the right to privacy as aright of personality. both the charter and the civil code cover governmental aswell as private action.the protection of personal information as well as access by the person isfurther enshrined not only in two statutes covering personal data in both thepublic and the private sectors29 but also by the act respecting health servicesand social services.30 the latter further buttresses the confidentiality of healthinformation by requiring an explicit consent from the patient for access (art. 19).in addition, the code of ethics of physicians governs the physician whether inhospital or private office and is a regulation pursuant to the act with force of law.finally, a 1992 decision of the supreme court of canada maintained that theright to information in the medical record was a personal right of the patient,although the file remained the property of the hospital.31medical files in the office of the private physician are subject to theprofessions code,32 which requires all professional corporations to adopt a codeof ethics. as mentioned, the code of ethics of physicians was adopted as aregulation28r. v. dyment, [1988] 2 s.c.r. 417; r. v. dersch, [1993] 3 s.c.r. 768.29act respecting access to documents held by public bodies and the protection ofpersonal information, r.s.q., c a. 2.1; act respecting the protection of personalinformation in the private sector, r.s.q., cp. 39.1.30act respecting health services and social services, r.s.q., c. s. 4.2.31mcinervey v. macdonald [1992] 2 r.s.q. 138.32professions code, r.s.q. c. c.26.appendix d183protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pursuant to law (art. 3.01) together with the medical act.33 these reinforce article9 of the quebec charter concerning the quasiconstitutional duty of professionalsecrecy. finally, article 35 of the civil code of quebec, adopted in 1994,enunciates the right to privacy of the person and also provides recourse to anaggrieved patient in the case of treatment outside the public hospital.as concerns research, consent (including record searches) must be free,informed, and given in writing.34 such consent is valid only for the period of timeapproved by the ethics committee (art. 19.1). an exception to this would besituations in which the director of professional services authorizes access withoutpatient consent, according to the legislation governing access to documents heldby public bodies. the researcher would have to demonstrate that the following:351. the intended use is not frivolous and the ends contemplated cannot beachieved otherwise, and2. such nominative information will be used in a manner that ensuresconfidentiality.these additional conditions of ethics approval and a determined period oftime for access for research were adopted into law in january 2000 following arecent case in which access to the medical records was provided and several yearslater the researcher wished to continue working with patient records. due to themerger of two hospitals, the records had been moved and the new director ofprofessional services considered that the consent was no longer valid. the courtof appeal however maintained that medical confidentiality was ﬁrelativeﬂ andexisted primarily to benefit the patient. since one of the aims of the research inquestion was to find the cause of susceptibility to manic depression andschizophrenia, the researcher needed access to the records for the purposes offamilial recruitment.35icelandon december 17, 1998, the icelandic parliament adopted an act on a healthsector database, (act 139/1998).36 this act foresees the creation and operationof a centralized database containing nonpersonally identifiable clinical data.companies can apply for a license to have access.article 7 of the act states that with the consent of health institutions or selfemployed health care workers, data derived from medical records may bedelivered33medical act r.s.q. c. m.9, art. 42.34civil code, arts. 23, 24; act to amend the act respecting health services and socialservices as regards access to uses of records, art. 19.1, adopted, january 2000.35parent c. maziade [1998] rjq 1444œ1457.36act on a health sector database, act 139/1998, iceland, 1998œ1999, http://brunnur.stjr.is/interpro/htr/htr.nsf/pages/gagngrlogenskappendix d184protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to the holder of the operating license (the ﬁlicenseeﬂ) for transfer into the healthsector database. the same article provides that the process shall be subject toconditions regarded as necessary by the data protection commission at any timeand that personal identifiers shall be encrypted before transfer to the database sothat employees of the licensee work only with nonpersonally identifiable data.personal identifiers shall be encrypted by oneway encryption, which cannot betraced back by using a cipher. the data protection commission shall carry outfurther encryption of personal identifiers using the methods that the commissiondeems to ensure confidentiality best.it is important here to underline the fact that it is employees of the healthinstitutions in question or selfemployed health workers who prepare the data fortransfer to the database and not employees of the licensee.article 10 of the act states that the licensee is permitted to process theclinical data in the health sector database derived from medical records,provided the data are processed and connected in such a way that they cannot belinked to identifiable individuals. the article provides, furthermore, that thelicensee shall develop methods and protocols that meet the requirements of thedata protection commission in order to ensure confidentiality in connecting datafrom the health sector database with data from a genealogical database and agenetic database.the article furthermore provides that the licensee is not permitted to provideinformation on individuals and that this should be ensured (e.g., by limitation ofaccess).the act contains detailed provisions on monitoring, which is entrusted tothree parties: (1) the operating committee, which shall monitor the creation andoperation of the database; (2) the data protection commission, which is subjectto the ministry of justice and responsible for general surveillance of personalprivacy in iceland; and (3) an interdisciplinary ethics committee, whichmonitors queries and research conducted using data from the health sectordatabase.finally, it is interesting to note that according to article 1.8, all data enteringthe health sector database are the common property of the icelandic nation andin the care and under the responsibility of the minister for health and socialsecurity, acting for the icelandic government. this applies both during the timethat the operating license is in effect and after its expiration.it has been argued that this law is (not) in conformity not only with domesticlaw (a special act on the rights of patients, [act 74/1997; reg. no. 227/1991 onmedical records and compilation of reports in health matters] pursuant to theact on physicians and the act on health service) but also with europeanstandards of data protection and with scientific freedom generally.3737arnardóttir, o.m. et al., ﬁthe icelandic health sector databaseﬂ (1999) 6 europeanjournal health law, 307œ362. for a critique of the database, see roscam abbing, h.,ﬁcentral health database in iceland and patient's rights,ﬂ (1999) 6 european journal ofhealth law, 363œ371.appendix d185protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on january 22 the ministry of health and social security prepared the issueof an operating license for the creation and operation of a health sectordatabase of nonidentifiable health information. the licensee is authorized toconvert information in the health sector database with a genetic database withthe approval of the data protection commission.no genetic information or samples can be obtained for research purposeswithout specific patient consent. it goes without saying, however, that any suchinformation found in the medical record would automatically be in the healthsector database unless the patient has exercised the optingout provision.conclusiongiven the often eclectic if not confusing state of the law due to the combinedeffect of privacy, medical confidentiality, and personal data protection, it isdifficult to draw any conclusions except perhaps to argue for the consolidationand harmonization of health data protection. this situation occurs becausealthough the trends in all three sectors are welcome, their combined effect createsuncertainty since it is not always clear which rules apply. moreover, mostcountries also provide for recourse to overarching constitutional protection, or inthe absence of such, to human rights legislation be it national or regional as ineurope. such consolidation and clarification including the ambit of legitimateexceptions would not only be welcome but perhaps serve as a first step towardsan international ﬁcharterﬂ on health information.furthermore, we are now witnessing a further expansion of healthinformation protection and promotion in the emergence of the right not to knowand in the area of research in the move from coding or encryption toanonymization. both of these recent developments are not without implications,the individual having been effectively removed from ongoing communication ofhealth information. four questions remain: (1) what degree of informed consentis required for the valid exercise of the ﬁright not to know.ﬂ (2) willanonymization although legally and ethically expedient, ultimately harm goodscience? (3) in the long run, will both impede identification for followup forproper medical treatment? (4) if so, have we unwittingly created a system ofoverprotection of the individual to the detriment of population health throughprevention?moreover, in this search for guidance and clarity, health information shouldbe distinguished from the sometimesdraconian overreach of personal dataprotection often aimed at thwarting access by commercial bodies. theindiscriminate application of this legislation when combined with the moral orlegal force of medical codes of ethics can indirectly harm individual health to saynothing of blocking the state's legitimate role in health systems planning. themajority of countries studied here cannot properly fulfill this latter obligation. inthe rush to promote individual privacy and autonomy with regard to healthinformation, we may have lost sight of the larger picture of the health of societyand that of future generations.appendix d186protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix ebiographical sketchesbernard lo (chair), is professor of medicine and director of theprogram in medical ethics at the university of california, san francisco. hechairs the end of life committee convened by the american college ofphysicians  american society of internal medicine, which is developingconsensus recommendations for clinical care near the end of life. he directs thenational coordinating office for the initiative to strengthen the patient  providerrelationship in a changing health care environment, funded by the robertwood johnson foundation. he also directs the ethics core of the center foraids prevention studies at ucsf. dr. lo is a member of the national bioethicsadvisory commission and of the data safety monitoring board for the aidsclinical trials group at the national institute of allergy and infectious diseases.he is a member of the institute of medicine and chairs the iom board on healthsciences policy. dr. lo has written more than 100 articles in peerreviewedmedical journals, on such issues as decisions about lifesustaining interventions,decisionmaking for incompetent patients, physicianassisted suicide, and ethicalissues regarding hiv infection. he is the author of resolving ethical dilemmas: aguide for clinicians, a comprehensive analysis of ethical dilemmas in adultmedicine. he is also a practicing general internist who teaches clinical medicineto residents and medical students.elizabeth b. andrews, m.p.h., ph.d., directs the worldwideepidemiology department at glaxo wellcome, based in research triangle park,north carolina and greenford, england. the epidemiology programencompasses epidemiologic research on safety, natural history of disease, diseaseburden,appendix e187protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and general descriptive epidemiology. she is currently president of theinternational society for pharmacoepidemiology, an organization broadlyrepresentative of government, industry, and academic researchers. dr. andrewsserves as adjunct associate professor of epidemiology at the university of northcarolina (unc) school of public health. she participates as a member of thepharmaceutical research and manufacturers of america clinical safetysurveillance committee and for three years chaired its epidemiologysubcommittee. she is a member of the editorial board of the journalpharmacoepidemiology and drug safety. she serves on the governing board ofthe unc school of public health's public health foundation. in addition, sheserves on the advisory panel on research of the association of americanmedical colleges and the data privacy working group of the europeanfederation of pharmaceutical industries and associations. she also serves on thefood and drug administration's reproductive health drugs advisorycommittee's subcommittee on pregnancy labeling. over the past two years, shehas testified on medical records confidentiality before the u.s. senate and housecommittees and the national committee on vital and health statistics. dr.andrews received her master's in public health and health policy andadministration and ph.d. in epidemiology from the university of north carolinaschool of public health. prior to joining burroughs wellcome in 1982, shemanaged the statewide regionalized perinatal care program and directed thepurchaseofcare services for the state health department of north carolina.john colmers is executive director of the maryland health carecommission (mhcc), an agency created through the merger of two existinghealth regulatory commissions. mhcc is charged with health care reformactivities for the state, the development and adoption of a state health plan, andthe compilation and analysis of health care datasets, among other responsibilities.prior to the merger, mr. colmers was executive director of the health careaccess and cost commission (hcacc), one of the organizations in the merger.the hcacc implemented many initiatives, including report cards providinginformation on the quality and performance of health maintenance organizationsand standards for the operation of electronic health networks. before this, mr.colmers was the executive director of the health services cost reviewcommission, overseeing maryland's allpayer hospital rate setting system. mr.colmers did undergraduate work at johns hopkins university, received hismaster of public health from the university of north carolina, and has returned tojohns hopkins university for doctoral study of health services research.george t. duncan is professor of statistics in the h. john heinz iiischool of public policy and management and the department of statistics atcarnegie mellon university. his current research work centers on informationtechnology and social accountability, especially on confidentiality issues. hechaired the panel on confidentiality and data access of the commission onbehavioural and social sciences and education (cbsse) committee on nationalappendix e188protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistics, which resulted in the report, private lives and public policies:confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. he chaired theamerican statistical association's committee on privacy and confidentiality. heserved on the american medical association's expert advisory panel on privacyand confidentiality. he has been editor of the theory and methods section of thejournal of the american statistical association. he is a fellow of the americanstatistical association, an elected member of the international statisticalinstitute, and a fellow of the american association for the advancement ofscience.janlori goldman directs the health privacy project at georgetownuniversity's institute for health care research and policy. the project isdedicated to ensuring that people's privacy is safeguarded in the health careenvironment. in 1997, ms. goldman was a visiting scholar at georgetownuniversity law center. in 1994, ms. goldman cofounded the center fordemocracy and technology, a nonprofit civil liberties organization committed topreserving free speech and privacy on the internet. ms. goldman also worked atthe electronic frontier foundation in 1994. from 1986 to 1994, ms. goldmanwas the staff attorney and director of the privacy and technology project of theamerican civil liberties union (aclu). while at the aclu, ms. goldman ledthe effort to enact the video privacy protection act and led efforts to protectpeople's health, credit and financial information, and personal information held bythe government. she was the legislative director of the minnesota affiliate of theaclu from 1984 to 1986. ms. goldman has testified frequently before the u.s.congress and served on numerous commissions and advisory boards. herpublications include ﬁa federal right of information privacy,ﬂ coauthored withjerry berman and included as a chapter in computers, ethics, and social values (ed. helen nissenbaum, prentice hall, 1995); privacy and health informationsystems: a guide to protecting patient confidentiality, coauthored with deirdremulligan (foundation for health care quality, 1996); ﬁprotecting privacy toimprove health care,ﬂ which appeared in health affairs, (november  december1998); and promoting health/protecting privacy: a primer, coauthored with zoehudson for the california health care foundation and consumers union. thehealth privacy project also recently released two reports: the state of healthprivacy: an uneven terrain/a comprehensive survey of state health privacystatutes and best principles for health privacy: a report of the health privacyworking group.craig walter hendrix is associate professor of medicine, divisionof clinical pharmacology, department of medicine, johns hopkins universityschool of medicine, where he is currently director of the johns hopkins'university drug development unit. he also holds joint appointments inpharmacology and molecular sciences and epidemiology. he earned his m.d. atgeorgetown university school of medicine followed by postdoctoral training atjohns hopkins hospital. he is boardcertified in internal medicine and infectiousdiseases.appendix e189protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.his clinical research has focused on hiv epidemiology and prevention withinmilitary populations and clinical pharmacology of antiretroviral drugs. dr.hendrix is invited to lecture worldwide on hiv impact, prevention andtreatment. his university service includes membership on the johns hopkinsuniversity school of medicine institutional review board.mark c. hornbrook, a health economist by training, is an associatedirector and senior investigator at the kaiser permanente center for healthresearch (chr). he leads the center's program in economic, social, and healthservices research and is a member of the senior management team at chr. hiscurrent research focuses on payment systems for hmos under private and publichealth insurance programs. with support from the health care financingadministration, the robert wood johnson foundation, and kaiser permanente,he is developing morbiditybased risk assessment models to adjust payments tohealth plans to counter selection bias. he is also developing and simulating a newrisk contracting payment system for medicare based on competitive marketpremiums rather than medicare feeforservice payments. previously, withsupport from kaiser foundation health plan, dr. hornbrook developed healthcare expense forecasting models using the sf36 and the medicare currentbeneficiary survey. dr. hornbrook directs the chr economics core inconducting a series of economic evaluations of several innovative diseasemanagement, disease prevention, and health care delivery programs related tolongterm care of frail elderly, smoking cessation, cancer screening, mentalillness, and childhood asthma, and other studies as well. dr. hornbrook received amaster's degree in economics from the university of denver in 1969 and a ph.d.in medical care organization, with emphasis in health economics, from theuniversity of michigan in 1975. currently, dr. hornbrook chairs the scientificreview and evaluation board of the health services research and developmentservice, department of veterans affairs. he also is a member of the measurescouncil of the foundation for accountability. he was named a fellow in theassociation for health services research in 1996.lisa i. iezzoni is professor of medicine at harvard medical school andcodirector of research in the division of general medicine and primary care,department of medicine, at beth israel deaconess medical center in boston. shereceived her degrees in medicine and health policy and management fromharvard university. dr. iezzoni has conducted numerous studies for the agencyfor health care policy and research, the health care financing administration,and private foundations on a variety of topics, including the use of clinical data topredict hospitalization costs and patient outcomes, comparing severity of illnessacross teaching and nonteaching hospitals, evaluating the utility of severityinformation for quality assessment, identifying complications of care usingadministrative data, and using information from hospital data systems to predictpatient clinical and functional outcomes. she has published and spoken widely onmeasurement of the severity of illness and has edited a textbook on riskadjustmentappendix e190protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for measuring health care outcomes. a 1996 recipient of the investigator awardin health policy research sponsored by robert wood johnson foundation, she isstudying disability policy issues relating to mobility impairments. dr. iezzoni ison the editorial boards of major medical health services research journals, and sheserves on the national committee on vital and health statistics and the board ofdirectors of the national forum for health care quality measurement andreporting.donald kornfeld is associate dean of the faculty of medicine of thecolumbia university college of medicine, and professor of psychiatry andattending psychiatrist at columbia presbyterian hospital. he served for six yearsas chairman of the institutional review board at the n.y. state psychiatricinstitute and since 1991 has been chairman of the columbia presbyterianmedical center institutional review board. he is director of the consultation/liaison and behavioral medicine service at the columbia presbyterian medicalcenter and was a member of the first ethics committee established there. he haspublished on a wide variety of psychiatric problems and ethical issues related tomedicine and surgery. he is a fellow of the american psychiatric association and apast president of the american psychosomatic society.elliot stone has been executive director and corporate eexecutiveofficer of the massachusetts health data consortium since it was established in1978 as a private, nonprofit corporation. the consortium is a neutral setting forthe collection and analysis of large health care databases. the consortiumpublishes annual reports on hospital prices, utilization, and communities' hospitaldependency to a broad constituency of health care organizations and businesscoalitions, and provides data and technical support to health services researchers.in 1994, mr. stone organized the affiliated health information networks of newengland project to improve the state's electronic health care informationinfrastructure among health plans and providers through standards required by thefederal health insurance portability and accountability. mr. stone served on theinstitute of medicine's committee on regional health data networks, whichpublished health data in the information age: use, disclosure and privacy. hewas a member of the committee to study national cryptography policy for thenational research council and the national academy of science's computerscience and telecommunications board and provided financial support for thenrc study for the record: protecting electronic health information.peter szolovits is professor of computer science and engineering inthe michigan instutute of technology (mit) department of electricalengineering and computer science and director of the clinical decisionmakinggroup within the mit laboratory for computer science. his research centers onthe application of artificial intelligence (ai) methods to problems of medicaldecision making and design of information systems for health care institutionsand patients. he has worked on problems of diagnosis, therapy planning,execution,appendix e191protecting data privacy in health services researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and monitoring for various medical conditions; computational aspects of geneticcounseling; controlled sharing of health information; and privacy andconfidentiality issues in medical record systems. his interests in ai includeknowledge representation, qualitative reasoning, and probabilistic inference. hisinterests in medical computing include webbased heterogeneous medical recordsystems, lifelong personal health information systems, and design ofcryptographic schemes for health identifiers. he teaches classes in artificialintelligence, programming languages, medical computing, medical decisionmaking, knowledgebased systems, and probabilistic inference. professorszolovits has been on the editorial board of several journals, has served asprogram chairman and on the program committees of national conferences, andhas been a founder of and consultant for several companies that apply ai toproblems of commercial interest, including w3health, which develops webbased solutions for connecting the health care community. he served on thecommittee on maintaining privacy and security in health care applications onthe national information infrastructure, which produced the nrc report for therecord.adele a. waller, j.d., is a partner and member of the health lawgroup with the chicago law firm of bell, boyd and lloyd. a substantial portionof her practice involves advising clients on legal issues related to healthinformation technology. ms. waller has spoken extensively on health informationtechnology law issues for organizations such as the american bar association,the american health lawyers association, american health informationmanagement association, university health system consortium, association forhealth services research, and the healthcare information management systemssociety. she has published numerous articles and book chapters on healthinformation technology law topics. ms. waller serves on the board of directorsof the american health lawyers association, chairs its annual healthinformation and technology conference, and served in the leadership of itshealth information and technology substantive law committee from 1994 to1999. she is a member of on the editorial advisory board of cch complianceand of the editorial board of aspen publishing's managed care law manual. ms. waller is a member of the adjunct faculty of the university of illinois atchicago and has been an adjunct faculty member for the health law institute atthe loyola university of chicago school of law.appendix e192