detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/9958improving access to and confidentiality of research data:report of a workshop74 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309071802 | doi 10.17226/9958christopher mackie and norman bradburn, editors; committee on nationalstatistics, national research councilimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving access to andconfidentiality of research datareport of a workshopcommittee on national statisticschristopher mackie and norman bradburn, editorscommission on behavioral and social sciences and educationnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. ¥ washington, d.c. 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the instituteof medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen fortheir special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract/grant no. sbr9709489 between the national academy of sciences and the national science foundation. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and donot necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support forthe project.international standard book number 0309071801additional copies of this report are available from national academy press, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, d.c. 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.eduprinted in the united states of america.copyright 2000 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.suggested citation: national research council (2000). improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshop. committee on national statistics, christopher mackie and norman bradburn, eds. commission on behavioral and social sciencesand education. washington, d.c.: national academy press.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr.bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. thenational academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination ofpolicy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by bothacademies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william a. wulfare chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on national statistics19992000john e. rolph (chair), marshall school of business, university ofsouthern californiajoseph g. altonji, department of economics, northwestern universitylawrence d. brown, department of statistics, university ofpennsylvaniajulie davanzo, rand, santa monica, californiawilliam f. eddy, department of statistics, carnegie mellon universityhermann habermann, statistics division, united nations, new yorkwilliam d. kalsbeek, survey research unit, department ofbiostatistics, university of north carolinaroderick j.a. little, school of public health, university of michiganthomas a. louis, division of biostatistics, university of minnesotacharles f. manski, department of economics, northwesternuniversityedward b. perrin, department of health services, university ofwashingtonfrancisco j. samaniego, division of statistics, university ofcalifornia, davisrichard l. schmalensee, sloan school of management,massachusetts institute of technologymatthew d. shapiro, department of economics, university ofmichiganandrew a. white, directorimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiacknowledgmentsthe committee on national statistics (cnstat) appreciates the time,effort, and valuable input of the many people who contributed to theworkshop on confidentiality of and access to research data and to thepreparation of this report. we would first like to thank those who madepresentations, which, along with the background papers prepared for theworkshop, helped identify many of the key issues in this area. the commentsmade by attendees contributed to a broadranging exchange of ideas that iscaptured in this summary report. we are also thankful for the additionalinput provided by participants on early report drafts. thanks are due especially to norman bradburn, former cnstat member, who as workshopchair provided valuable advice during the planning stages and the leadershipnecessary for conducting a successful workshop. the agenda for the workshop was developed in consultation with richard suzman, director of behavioral and social research at the national institute on aging, whose input wasessential in identifying workshop objectives.particular appreciation is due to those who worked to organize the workshop and prepare this report. christopher mackie served as study director forthe workshop. he led the planning of the workshop, worked to ensure itssuccessful conduct, prepared the report drafts, and revised the report in response to comments from reviewers and workshop participants. tom jabine,who served as consultant to the committee, offered valuable guidance on theagenda, the selection of appropriate presenters, and the preparation of thisreport. he and heather koball, research associate in cnstat, contributedsignificantly to our work with a paper on the practices of organizations thatimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiacknowledgmentsdistribute publicuse data, which was presented at the workshop and is summarized in this report. the extra time, guidance, and input of the cnstatsubcommittee for the workshopñthomas louis, roderick little, and charlesmanskiñfurther enhanced the workshopõs outcome and this report. mironstraf, former cnstat director, was responsible for early project development and workshop planning. cnstat staff members terri scanlan andjamie casey were responsible for all of the details involved in organizing theworkshop and preparing this report. rona briere edited the final draft.eugenia grohman, associate director for reports in the commission on behavioral and social sciences and education, guided the report through thereview process, final editing, and publication.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the report review committee of the national researchcouncil. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid andcritical comments that will assist the institution in making the publishedreport as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutionalstandards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge.the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protectthe integrity of the deliberative process.we thank the following individuals for their participation in the review ofthis report: william f. eddy, department of statistics, carnegie mellon university; amitai etzioni, department of sociology, george washington university; jack feldman, center for health affairs/project hope, bethesda,md; olivia mitchell, wharton school, university of pennsylvania; and richard rockwell, interuniversity consortium for political and social research,university of michigan.although the individuals listed above provided constructive commentsand suggestions, it must be emphasized that responsibility for the finalcontent of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and theinstitution.norman bradburn, workshop chairimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixcontentsprefacexi1introduction12the data access, confidentiality tradeoff53ethical and legal requirements associatedwith data dissemination184alternative approaches for limiting disclosurerisks and facilitating data access295current agency and organization practices37references and bibliography51appendixes53a workshop participants55b workshop agenda58improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethe workshop summarized in this report was convened by the committee on national statistics (cnstat) to promote discussion aboutmethods for advancing the often conflicting goals of exploiting theresearch potential of microdata and maintaining acceptable levels of confidentiality. the primary sponsor of the workshop was the national instituteon aging (nia), but additional funding was received from the agency forhealth care policy and research; the bureau of labor statistics; the nationallibrary of medicine; the office of research and statistics, social securityadministration; and the office of the assistant secretary for planning andevaluation, u.s. department of health and human services. sponsors voiceda common desire to develop research programs aimed at quantitatively assessing the risks of reidentification in surveys linked to administrative data.sponsors also stressed the importance of demonstrating and weighing thevalue of linked data to research and policy. prior to the cnstat workshop,nia funded a preworkshop conference, organized through the university ofmichigan, to illustrate this valueñparticularly as it applies to research onaging issues. the workshop was designed to advance the dialogue necessaryfor federal agencies to make sound decisions about how and to whom torelease data, and in what cases to allow linkage to administrative records.sponsors were interested in improving communication among communitieswith divergent interests, as well as the decisionmaking frameworks for guiding data release procedures.this report outlines essential themes of the access versus confidentialitydebate that emerged during the workshop. among these themes are thexiimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.tradeoffs and tensions between the needs of researchers and other data userson the one hand and confidentiality requirements on the other; the relativeadvantages and costs of data perturbation techniques (applied to facilitatepublic release) versus restricted access as tools for improving security; and theneed to quantify disclosure risksñboth absolute and relativeñcreated byresearchers and research data, as well as by other data users and other types ofdata.the workshop was not designed to produce policy recommendations.however, this report does summarize areas of discussion in which commonground among some participants emerged. for example, a subset of participants endorsed the idea that both access and confidentiality can benefit from(1) more coordination among agencies regarding data release procedures andcreation of data access outlets, (2) increased communication between dataproducers and users, (3) improved quantification of the disclosure risks andresearch benefits associated with different types of data release, and (4) stricterenforcement of laws designed to ensure proper use of restricted access data.finally, the report anticipates the direction of future cnstat projects.future work will likely address evolving statistical techniques for manipulating data in ways that preserve important statistical properties and allow forbroader general data release; new, less burdensome ways of providing researchers with access to restricted data sets; and the role of licensing coupledwith graduated civil and criminal penalties for infringement.norman bradburn, workshop chairxiiprefaceimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11introductionin october 1999, the committee on national statistics (cnstat), inconsultation with the institute of medicine, convened a 2day workshopto identify ways of advancing the often conflicting goals of exploiting theresearch potential of microdata and preserving confidentiality. the emphasisof the workshop was on longitudinal data that are linked to administrativerecords; such data are essential to a broad range of research efforts, but canalso be vulnerable to disclosure. administrative data are collected to carry outagency missions and constitute the majority of agency data. an additionalñmuch smallerñamount of data is collected specifically for research and otherpublic purposes. it is sometimes feasible and useful to merge the latter datawith the more extensive administrative records.cnstat has had an active history working in the area of data confidentiality and access, culminating with the panel study that produced the volumeprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics (national research council and social science research council, 1993). that study resulted in a series of recommendations for advancingresearchersõ access to data without compromising the ability to protect theconfidentiality of survey respondents. this workshop brought together several participants from that study and many others representing various communitiesñdata producers from federal agencies and research organizations;data users, including academic researchers; and experts in statistical disclosure limitation techniques, confidentiality policies, and administrative andlegal procedures.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2improving access to and confidentiality of research datakey issuesthe development of longitudinal data sets linked to health, economic,contextual geographic, and employer information has created unique andgrowing research opportunities. however, the proliferation of linked datahas simultaneously produced a complex set of challenges that must be met topreserve the confidentiality of information provided by survey respondentsand citizens whose administrative records are entrusted to the government.unprecedented demand for household and individuallevel data, along withthe continuing rapid development of information technology, has drawn increasing attention to these issues. technological advances have rapidly improved the range and depth of data; opportunities to access, analyze, andprotect data have grown as well. however, technology has concurrently created new methods for identifying individuals from available information, ofwhich longitudinal research data are but one of many sources.longitudinal files that link survey, administrative, and contextual dataprovide exceptionally rich sources of information for researchers working inthe areas of health care, education, and economic policy. to construct suchfiles, substantial resources must be devoted to data acquisition and to theresolution of technical, legal, and ethical issues. in most cases, requirementsdesigned to protect confidentiality rule out the type of universal, unrestricteddata access that custodiansñand certainly usersñof such databases mayprefer.several modes of dissemination are currently used to provide access toinformation contained in linked longitudinal databases. dissemination istypically restricted either at the source, at the access point, or both. productssuch as aggregated, crosstabulation tables are published regularly and madeavailable to all users, but of course offer no recordlevel detail. this type ofdata does not support research into complex individual behavior. publicusemicrodata files, on the other hand, offer detail at the individual or householdlevel and are available with minimal use restrictions. however, producers ofmicrodata must suppress direct identifier fields and use data masking techniques to preserve confidentiality. additional methods, such as licensingagreements, data centers, and remote and limited access, have been developedto limit either the types of users allowed access to the data, the level of datadetail accessible by a given user, or both. restricted access arrangements aregenerally designed to provide users with more detail than they would get froma publicuse file.it is within this context that the workshop participants debated the keyissues, which can loosely be organized at two levels. the first is the tradeoffthat exists between increasing data access on the one hand and improvingimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction3data security and confidentiality on the other.1 to examine this tradeoff, it isnecessary to quantify, to the extent possible, disclosure risks and costs, as wellas the benefits associated with longitudinal microdata and with linking toadministrative records. decisions about what types of data can be madeavailable, to whom, and by what method hinge on the assessment of theserelative costs and benefits. researchers typically appeal for greater access tounaltered data, while stewards of the data are understandably often morefocused on assessing and minimizing disclosure risk.at the second level of discourse, participants discussed alternative approaches to limiting disclosure risk while facilitating data access. given thatall longitudinal microdata require some protections, the compelling questionis which approach best serves data users while maintaining acceptable levelsof security. the choice reduces essentially to two options: (1) restrictingaccessñphysically limiting who gets to see the data, or (2) altering the datasufficiently to allow for safe broader (public) access. other elements, such aslegal deterrents, also come into play. workshop participants articulated indetail the merits and relative advantages of alternative approaches. theirarguments are summarized in this report.workshop goalsas noted above, a central objective of the workshop was to review thebenefits and risks associated with publicuse research data files and to explorealternative procedures for restricting access to sensitive data, especially longitudinal survey data that have been linked to administrative records. doing sorequires considering the impact on each group involvedñsurvey respondents,data producers, and data usersñof measures designed to reduce disclosurerisk. presenters from the academic community reviewed the types of researchthat are enhanced, or only made possible, by the availability of linked longitudinal data. participants also identified and suggested methods for improvingcurrent practices used by agencies and research organizations for releasingpublicuse data and for establishing restricted access to nonpublic files. theoverarching theme was the importance of advancing methods that maximizethe social return on investments in research data, while fully complying withlegal and ethical requirements.1early on in the workshop, a participant clarified the distinction between òprivacyó andòconfidentiality.ó privacy typically implies the right to be left alone personally, the right not tohave property invaded or misused, freedom to act without outside interference, and freedomfrom intrusion and observation. in the context of research data, confidentiality is more relevant. the term refers to information that is sensitive and should not be released to unauthorized entities. it was suggested that confidentiality implies the need for technical methods ofsecurity.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4improving access to and confidentiality of research datathe workshop, then, was designed with the following goals in mind:¥to review the types of research that are enhanced, or only made possible, using linked longitudinal data.¥to review current practices and concerns of federal agencies and otherdata producing organizations.¥to provide an overview of administrative arrangements used to preserve confidentiality.¥to identify ways of fostering data accessibility in secondary analysis.¥to assess the utility of statistical methods for limiting disclosure risk.to date, efforts to address these themes have been hindered by inadequateinteraction between researchers who use the data and agencies that producethem and regulate their dissemination. researchers may not understand andmay become frustrated by accessinhibiting rules and procedures; on the otherhand, agencies and institutional review boards are not fully aware of howstatistical disclosure limitation measures impact data users. the workshopbrought the two groups together to help overcome these communicationbarriers.report organizationworkshop topics were organized into the following sessions: (i) linkedlongitudinal databasesñachievements to date and research applications, (ii)legal and ethical requirements for data dissemination, (iii) procedures forreleasing publicuse microdata files, and (iv) procedures for restricted accessto research data files. this report is structured slightly differently to focus onthemes as they emerged during the workshop. chapter 2 outlines the tradeoffbetween data access and confidentiality. presentations on the research benefits of linked longitudinal data are summarized, along with discussions ofdisclosure risk assessment and quantification. chapter 3 reviews presentations that addressed ethical and legal aspects of data dissemination, as well asdiscussion on the role of institutional review boards. chapter 4 summarizesparticipantsõ assessments of competing approaches to limiting disclosure riskand facilitating user access; the focus is on two primary competing approachesñdata perturbation and access limitation. agency and organizationpractices are the subject of chapter 5. in adition, two appendices are provided: appendix a is a list of the workshop participants; appendix b is theworkshop agenda.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52the data access, confidentiality tradeoffthis chapter presents participantsõ views on the workshopõs overarchingthemeñthe balancing of data protection needs and requirementsagainst the benefit of access to linked longitudinal data. academicresearchers were understandably more vocal about improving data detail andaccess, while data stewards were more concerned about security and protection of confidentiality. the lines between the two communities are not alwaysclearly drawn, however. for instance, most federal agencies are accountablefor both functions, protecting the interests of data subjects through procedures that ensure appropriate standards of privacy and confidentiality, andfacilitating responsible dissemination to users (national research counciland social science research council, 1993).it is impossible to specify a universally applicable optimal tradeoff between data access and data protection. the value of dataintensive research ishighly variable, as are mission, operation, and data production across agencies. the panel that produced the report private lives and public policiesrecognized this variability and did not advocate trying to identify such atradeoff (national research council and social science research council,1993). however, workshop participants expressed general optimism aboutthe possibilities for developing tools that would enhance, on a casebycasebasis, the ability to increase data access without compromising data protection or, conversely, to increase confidentiality without compromising dataaccess.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6improving access to and confidentiality of research datarole of linked longitudinal microdatain research and policythe nation faces a range of increasingly complex policy issues in suchareas as social security, health care, population aging, changing savings patterns, advancing medical technology, and changing family structure. addressing these issues will require increasingly sophisticated data and behavioral modeling. microdata sets, such as those from the health and retirementstudy (hrs), offer the most promising means of answering specific questionssuch as how social security interacts with pensions and savings in householdefforts to finance retirement, how social security age eligibility requirementsaffect retirement rates and timing, and how changes in outofpocket medicalexpenses affect utilization of federal programs.survey data sets, particularly those linked to administrative records, facilitate a broad spectrum of research that can shed light on such questions,and that could not otherwise be reliably conducted. additionally, linking toexisting information can streamline the data production process by reducingthe need to duplicate survey activities. linking of survey and administrativedata has the potential to both improve data quality and reduce data production costs.research benefits of linking survey and administrative dataresearchers attending the workshop expressed the view that data linkingopens up a wide range of research and modeling options. richard burkhauserof cornell university presented his paper (coauthored by robert weathers,also of cornell), òhow policy variables influence the timing of social security disability applications,ó to lead off the opening session. his presentationfocused on how the hrs made his study possible. burkhauser and otherparticipants praised the hrs, calling it a clear òcase studyó of the potential oflinked longitudinal data to advance policyoriented social science research.for his application, burkhauser was able to model the effects of socialsecurity on economic behavior, including retirement decisions. this type ofanalysis follows in the tradition of economic research conducted during the1970s that used the retirement history survey and the exact match file,which actually linked current population survey data to internal revenueservice (irs) and social security records.1 in the opinion of several partici1these data stimulated significant research in the 1970s and set the agenda for the 1980s.however, during the 1980s, budget cutbacks, combined with the emerging emphasis on confidentiality, affected the ability of the social security administration and other agencies to produce and disseminate new data.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the data access, confidentiality tradeoff7pants, the hrs files, along with new data sets from other sources, such as thedisability evaluation study, will be the key inputs for models that will allowresearchers to address policy questions about household savings patterns,social security solvency, worker retirement patterns, and other issues thatrequire accurate and detailed financial information.the hrs longitudinal data set follows about 22,000 persons aged 50 andabove and their spouses; data are collected every other year. with the consentof participating individuals, survey data are linked to social security earningshistories and also to some employer pension plan data. linked records thatallow identification at as low as the state level are maintained internally. thehrs is available in a public useform, and with linkages to social security andpension information under restricted conditions. access to geocoding is alsorestricted; to gain such access, a researcher must go through an institutionalreview board with a research plan and data protection provisions. firmleveldata have been linked as well, and while access to medicare data has not yetbeen authorized, work on associated data collection processes and restrictedaccess protocols is in progress. multiple linkages are also permitted, typicallyunder even more restricted conditions.the hrs also provides detailed survey informationñsome of it retrospectiveñabout the health conditions and work patterns of respondents.however, it is the linkage to administrative records that is exceptionally valuable for policy research. linking to social security data allows researchers toconstruct earnings histories and to determine each personõs potential disability benefits. past earnings are available to predict potential future earnings forcases in which individuals have not yet applied for benefits. linking hrs datawith administrative records and geographic information allowed burkhauserand weathers to answer questions that could not otherwise have been answered. for instance, the authors were able to estimate how disability allowance rates affected the timing and rate of application for benefits. likewise,they were able to estimate the behavioral impact of expected benefit level,expected earnings, gender effects, and policy variables.linking to administrative records can improve data accuracy as well asdata scope by giving researchers access to information that individuals maynot be able to recall or estimate accurately in a survey context. survey datacan be biased as a result of flaws in respondent memory or understanding ofmeasurement concepts. for instance, the hrs is linked to social security filescontaining lifetime earnings data that would be virtually impossible for respondents to recall or even find in records. similar situations arise withregard to medical records. also, survey data are devalued if they fail to capture variability of parameters accurately, since this variability is central tomodeling efforts and, in turn, the ability to answer policy questions. hrslinkages introduce accuracy and detail to the data that are particularly constructive for modeling savings incentives, retirement decisions, and other dyimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8improving access to and confidentiality of research datanamic economic behavior. the authors concluded that the hrs was a clearexample in which the potential research benefits of linking were sufficientlylarge that the social security administration could justify approving the linking proposal with minimal controversy.also in the first session, rachel gordon of the university of illinois atchicago presented a second example illustrating the benefits of data linking.her research investigates the impact of community context on child development and socialization patterns, as well as the impact of the availability ofchild care on parentsõ work decisions. by having access to a national longitudinal survey of youth (nlsy) file with detailed geographic codes for survey respondents, gordon was able to add contextual data, such as the availability of child care, for the neighborhoods in which respondents lived.gordonõs application highlights the tradeoff between data precision and disclosure risks. access to census tractlevel geocoding permits more sensitiveconstruction of community and child care variables central to the study butcould, under certain conditions, greatly increase the indentifiability of individual nlsy records.during the general discussion, participants cited other aspects of linkingthat increase data utility. linking makes it possible to get more out of isolateddata sets that would otherwise have limited application. the process canincrease the value of data sets, reduce data collection redundancies, and improve data accuracy in a costeffective manner, and provides added flexibilityto meet unforeseen future research needs with existing data sets. for example, if the census bureauõs survey of income and program participationcould be linked to administrative tax return records, income data would likelybe more accurate and the cost of the survey decreased. robert willis of theuniversity of michigan also made the point that this type of linking reducesresponse burden. if survey designers know that links can be made to administrative data, they can limit the length of questionnaires.the benefits of linked data extend beyond social science research, whichwas the focus of this workshop. robert boruch from the university of pennsylvania pointed out, for example, that linking records is essential for randomized field trials in the social sector (crime, welfare, education). j. michaeldean from the university of utah medical center reiterated these points formedical research, observing that there is no way to conduct highquality clinical trials in many different areas without the capacity for linking; the same canbe said of work in criminal justice.linking also facilitates research on infrequent events, such as rare diseases, that affect only a small percentage of the population. in such cases,working from general sample data does not provide adequate sample sizes fortarget groups. populationbased data, which are very expensive to collect, areoften required. linking can, in some instances, provide a much less costlysubstitute.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the data access, confidentiality tradeoff9assessing and articulating the social value of researchrobert boruch noted in his presentation that 20 years ago, despite interagency agreements to link data sources at the irs, the census bureau, andother agencies, examples of the benefits of linking were few and far between.in contrast, current research, as represented by workshop presentations insession i, demonstrates the extent to which this landscape has changed. yetseveral researchers expressed concern that it seems easier to discuss the risksassociated with data provision than to communicate the benefits convincingly. they suggested that researchers have done a poor job of publicizing thevalue of their work. boruch summarized the view, noting, òwe do not sellsocial research well in this country, and that is part of the reason why at leasta half dozen large private foundations are trying to understand how to do thatjob better.óof course, it can be difficult for agencies and organizations to assess thevalue of their data without carefully tracking the numbers and types of users,as well as information on those being denied access. the panel that producedprivate lives and public policies explicitly recommended establishing procedures for keeping records of data requests denied or partially fulfilled. thisrecommendation could be expanded to encourage full documentation of datausage. developing archives and registries of data performance may serve asan effective first step toward fostering understanding by both the public andpolicy makers of the extent to which dataintensive research provides keyinformation.research impact of data alteration versus access restrictionalternative methods for reducing statistical disclosure risks were discussedat length. at the most general level, the options fall into two categoriesñdataalteration and access restriction. the discussion of these approaches is detailed in chapters 4 and 5. on balance, researchers participating in the workshop expressed a preference for monitoring the behavior of scientists overaltering the content of data sets to permit broader distribution. they favoredlicensing agreements, data enclaves, and the like over perturbation methods.they also advocated the use of legal remedies (discussed in chapters 3 and 4)whenever possible as a nonintrusive (to ruleabiding researchers) alternativethat rewards responsible data use.researchers expressed serious concern about the impact of statistical disclosure limitation techniques that distort variable relationships and that mayhave an unanticipated (or even anticipated) impact on modeling results. theperception among leading researchers appears to be that altered or, morespecifically, synthetic data can solve some problems, but are inadequate forthe majority of cuttingedge work. regardless of its accuracy, this perceptionimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10improving access to and confidentiality of research dataimplies that such data may be less likely to be used, which damages the research enterprise. sophisticated data perturbation also increases the methodological knowledge researchers must have to understand data, utilize themlegitimately, and produce interpretable results.several researchers cautioned that, although they would rather live withthe burden of limited access than deal with synthetic data, data centers andother limited access arrangements do impose costs on research. to the extentthat data centers favor largebudget research projects, less wellfunded disciplines can be prevented from accessing important data resources. also, animportant reason for accessing a data set is to replicate findings of otherresearchers. typically, programs used to create data files must be designed insuch a way that they can be shared by others wishing to replicate work. whenresearchers must repeat the entire data acquisition process, documentationand replication become more cumbersome. additionally, one participantnoted that when projects must be approved by agencies that host data, thepotential is created for censorship, as well as milder forms of restriction arising from a lack of familiarity with the scientific literature.participants also raised the issue of research timing as it relates to policyrelevance. the benefits of research can be dampened when data acquisition isarduous and results are delayed. for instance, it took burkhauser and weathers 2 years to gain access to restricted data required for their analysis. accessing previously linked data will become less timeconsuming if data centers areable to streamline their procedures effectively.at data enclaves, researchers must typically submit programs to centerstaff who then perform the necessary data processing steps. for burkhauserand weathers, this meant enlisting hrs staff to merge the data sets, run theprograms, and produce output that could then be rechecked. the length ofthis iterative process depends on the turnaround time from the data centerand the number of adjustments and resubmissions required by the researcher.this process can appear burdensome and inefficient to researchers accustomed to having access to detailed data, doing the coding, and creating extractfiles themselves. these researchers argue that one must understand the process of research to assess the effectiveness of a remote access program.another indirect consequence, noted by rachel gordon, of limiting access to smallarea geographic codes for survey respondents is that doing somay conceal demand by researchers for better data of one type or another. ifresearchers know, for example, that they can link contextual information, thistype of work will be done, and in the process, the type of information ofinterest to the research community will be revealed. this feedback can in turnbe used by producing agencies and organizations to make funding and allocation decisions.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the data access, confidentiality tradeoff11the confidentiality protection constraint:assessing the risksin addition to estimating the value of data access, efficient and balancedpolicy requires accurately assessing the disclosure risks (and associated socialcost) posed by microdata and linking.2 risk of disclosure is affected by numerous data set characteristics. level of geographic detail is often the factorcited first. smallarea geocodes can make reidentification possible using basicstatistical techniques. more advanced computer science methods, outlinedby latanya sweeney of carnegiemellon university, can substantially increasethe power of reidentification techniques. as the sample approaches its underlying population, the geographic unit must increase in size if a constant levelof protection is to be maintained. certain types of surveys, such as those forpeople with rare medical conditions, maintain high sample rates from thesubpopulation from which they are drawn. likewise, geographic units mustincrease in size with the number of variables that can be crossreferenced ifdisclosure risk is to be held constant.in addition to detrimental effects on exposed citizens, disclosure eventscan negatively impact dataintensive research enterprises. several workshopparticipants argued that more work is needed on assessing the impact ofdisclosure (or perceived high risk) on survey participation. if potential surveyparticipants observe instances of disclosure, or even perceive that confidentiality is becoming less secure, it may become more difficult for data producingorganizations and agencies to enlist their cooperation. arthur kennickell ofthe federal reserve board suggested that disclosure of individuals in the fedõssurvey of consumer finances might endanger the whole study, even if it werejust an annoyance for those involved. similarly, if potential survey participants believe that linking increases risks, or that all data about them areavailable through linking, they may be less forthcoming with information andtheir time. a theme that emerged from the workshop was that advancingaccess and confidentiality objectives requires cognizance of the relationshipbetween the perceptions of respondents and the ability to collect data.3 developing better methods for eliciting consent and educating the public about2the riskcost relationship question was raised but not answered at the workshop. risk is afunction of both the probability of and the potential damage from disclosure. participantsacknowledged the need to assess disclosure risks; they were less certain about how best toquantify harmñthe true costñthat results from disclosure. this question requires additionalattention.3a report produced by the panel on privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response (national research council, 1979) provides some evidence about respondent attitudes,indicating that promises about confidentiality and data security are often questioned by thepublic.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12improving access to and confidentiality of research datathe real risks associated with survey involvement may be a costeffective use ofresources.absolute versus relative risks associated with data access and linkingdiscussions of disclosure risk often emphasize the isolated probabilitythat identifiable information will be revealed about an individual from a survey or administrative data set. cnstat member thomas louis of the university of minnesota suggested recasting the debate: instead of comparingrisks with probability zero, one might consider how the probability of disclosure changes as a result of a specific data release or linkage, or from adding (ormasking) fields in a data set. in this context, the question becomes whatmarginal risk is associated with an action.for cases in which the same data are available elsewhere, even if not in thesame form or variable combination, the added risk of releasing a research datafile may be comparatively small. given the current trend whereby more andmore data are becoming available, it may be reasonable to assume that themarginal risk of releasing research data has actually diminished. the validityof this assumption is, at present, unknown since no one has estimated the riskof disclosure as a function of survey inclusion conditional on the existence ofdata available from other sources. if security risks are rising rapidly in general, the relative risk of scientific survey data may be decreasing.robert gellman, consultant, described the sensitive data that are available from a wide range of sources. records such as driverõs licenses, voterregistration information, vehicle licenses, property tax records, arrest records,and political contributions, to name a few, are readily available to the publicin many jurisdictions. additionally, marketers compile this information intolists that are also available, often at low cost. companies have software designed to locate, retrieve, and crossreference information to construct detailed consumer profiles and mailing lists. for a given individual, these listsmay include name, address, age, date of birth, marital status, income, household size, number of credit cards, occupation, phone number, and even socialsecurity number. much of this information is constructed from linkagesacross sources. however, these marketoriented data collectors are not typically building their products from longitudinal research data sources.some participants argued that policy makers need to consider how rulesshould differ and how each should apply to different types of data. thereappear to be far more recorded instances of breached confidentiality withnonresearch data, or at least data used for nonresearch purposes.4 if this is4in fact, though there have been numerous cases reported anecdotally in which proceduralrules governing data use were violated, there are no known cases in which a respondent washarmed as a result of disclosures from a research data set.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the data access, confidentiality tradeoff13true, legislation designed to protect against data misuse, if not carefully constructed, could extend unnecessarily to research data or, on the other hand, betoo lax to safeguard the public from commercial data abuses.confusion over confidentiality risks associated with different types ofdata can inhibit the creation and productive exploitation of legitimate research data. the risks associated with participating in a welldesigned andwellconducted scientific survey may be very different from those posed bymarketing data; when these distinctions become blurred and all data production activities are viewed homogeneously, the public is more likely to believethat data endanger privacy. although survey data may not add much to thedanger, suspicions about data in general make collecting data more difficult,which in turn constrains dataintensive research.j. michael dean pointed out the importance of comparing the risks posedby linked data against those posed by native data setsñthat is, the originaldata from which the links were made. in many cases, he argued, the nativedatabases are already sensitive and as such require adequate protection. thelinking may create a combined data set that increases disclosure risks substantially, but this is not always the case. a disclosure incident occurring from alinked data source is not necessarily caused by the linking; it might haveoccurred from the standalone data as well. again, the marginal risk associated with the link needs to be evaluated, preferably against the research benefit. this evaluation requires assessing the extent to which stewards and usersof data sets are likely to be responsible for leaks. it is necessary to assess howlikely people handling medical records or working at agencies are to be sourcesof leaks relative to users of linked data. effort expended to protect the securityof data at the source versus at the linking phase should be proportional to therelative disclosure risks posed at each point. unfortunately, such assessmentsof relative risk have as yet typically not been made.it is also important to distinguish between organizationally linked data(such as the hrs) and individual userlinked data. the enormous growth ofcomputing power and data availability is constantly changing the cost parameters of òsnooping.ó to begin with, the prospective linker must have softwarethat can be expensive. some probabilistic matching programs can cost thousands of dollars, while other types of data linking can be performed with toolsas simple as microsoft access. the cost of linking is a deterrent, but this costvaries significantly with the type of linking performed. latanya sweeneyreported that she is able to identify individuals from a range of publicly available data sources using simple software in combination with creative methods. however, her applications have thus far focused on localized geographicdata sources, and it remains to be seen how far computer sciencebased methods can go toward identifying individuals from national longitudinal surveyslinked to administrative records.the probability of being able to identify a record within a longitudinalimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14improving access to and confidentiality of research dataresearch database also depends on the snooperõs objective. knowing whetheran individual is in a sample makes an enormous difference in terms of identifiability (juster, 1991). for instance, a snooper can guess with much greatercertainty whether an individual is in a localized database of voter registrationrecords than whether an individual is in the hrs. of course, if the snooper issimply trying to identify a random record, that is another matter altogether.5it is important to note that, for samplebased research data sets, a given levelof confidentiality can generally be obtained with less protection than is required for populationbased data sources, such as voter registration records,municipal registries, local censuses, and hospital administrative records.a related issue is the need to distinguish among different kinds of datausers. at one end of the spectrum are individuals whose data use is motivatedby objectives other than disclosing identities intentionally; at the other endare those with vested interests in doing just that. the latter group may beinvolved in marketing, conflict resolution, law enforcement, or a range ofother activities. it may be presumed that researchers typically fall at the òsafeóend of the spectrum, and that those seeking information on specific individuals are less likely to rely on research data than on other sources.6 however, theextent to which this generalization holds is not known.nonetheless, several participants expressed the view that access rulesmust be tailored to reflect risk levels posed by specific types of data users.when access rules are set universally, they typically tend to protect againstthe most dangerous users, limiting the ability to maximize the social returnon data. it is highly unlikely that the same legal framework designed toprotect individuals from marketers, employers, or the media is appropriateto apply to researchers and research data. the risks and benefits involved arenot comparable.on the other hand, several participants indicated that it is no simple taskto regulate data access by class of user since traditional categories overlap, anddata users may work in multiple areas. to establish clear rules and procedures for researchers, these participants suggested first gaining a clearer ideaof who needs to be covered and in what way. no one has adequately sorted5this point also relates to the debate between sweeney and dean about the ease with whichdata sources can be linked. the distinction between sweeneyõs positionñthat linking is inexpensive and requires only basic softwareñand deanõsñthat linking is difficult and expensiveñis at least partially tied to a snooperõs objective. sweeneyõs works suggests that it istechnically possible to quickly link records of some individuals from two large files; at the sametime, as dean argued, building an accurate comprehensive linked data set from the two sourcesmay require many identifiers and a high degree of sophistication.6similar arguments were advanced to support the view that regulating the behavior of datausers is more efficient than altering the data to allow broader access. this discussion is reviewed in chapter 4.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the data access, confidentiality tradeoff15out how identification of the various players, even those in the research communityñe.g., top researchers, all researchers, graduate studentsñshouldwork.quantifying disclosure risks and costs, andresearch and policy benefitsas suggested earlier, a fully informed data release policy requires quantitative estimates of the potential social costs and benefits associated with therelease. unfortunately, given casebycase variability and uncertainty in theprocess of scientific discovery, there is no obvious mechanism available thatcan facilitate evaluation of the balance between disclosure risk and data utility. during session iii of the workshop, sallie kellermcnulty of los alamosnational laboratory and george duncan of carnegiemellon university presented a paper that begins to define such an operational construct.statistical disclosure risks are defined by the ability of snoopers to drawinferences from deidentified data; linking is generally part of this process.the authorsõ framework, represented in the diagram below, essentially attempts to maximize data utility by minimizing necessary distortion, subject toa maximum tolerable risk constraint.data utility is a function of usefulness for statistical inference, and may bereflected in bias, variance, or mean square error characteristics inherent in thedata. options for maintaining tolerable risk include restricting data detail,restricting access to the data, or a combination of the two. identifying anoptimal data access strategy involves a difficult maximization problem sincethe parameters are not constant.in their presentation, duncan and kellermcnulty emphasized restricdisclosure riskoriginal datamaximumtolerableriskreleased data no datadata utilityimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16improving access to and confidentiality of research datative data release as opposed to restricted data accessñspecifically (1) datamasking and (2) synthetic data. a goal of their work is to quantify disclosurerisk and data utility, distinguishing between identity disclosure (e.g., associating the name of a respondent with a piece or pieces of released information)and attribute disclosure (e.g., estimating an attribute value associated with anindividual). kellermcnulty discussed how proponents of the frameworkmight identify important parameters of the process intended to measure riskand data utility generically. full utilization of their framework would entailcomparison of statistical properties of raw versus perturbed data. the eventual goal would be to allow choices in setting parameters that would maximize the tradeoff between data utility and risk and thereby avoid distortingdata more than is necessary.the authors reviewed the algebra of some simple univariate examplesthat illustrate the framework for assessing risks associated with data dissemination strategies. their conclusions pointed broadly to the need to (1) extendtheir univariate examples to more realistic settings, and (2) develop risk andutility measures that are a function of the masking parameters and othermatrix factors used to create synthetic records. finally, the authors noted thata multitude of possible dissemination strategies exist; level of masking andextent of synthetic iteration are specific to data set and application. in no casewill the optimal tradeoff imply 100 percent disclosure prevention.latanya sweeney was discussant for the kellermcnulty and duncan presentation. she has analyzed technical protections and risks from a computational science perspective, and is concerned with identifying optimal modesof releasing information so that inferences can be controlledñagain in anenvironment where information about individuals is increasing at an exponential rate. it should be noted that sweeneyõs comments were directed toward a broad class of information and not specifically toward longitudinalresearch databases. this broadened focus provided essential context withinwhich the relative risks of different types of data could be discussed.sweeneyõs computational approaches to assessing risk involve constructing functions that relate hierarchical data aggregation to data security. working at the cell level, she has developed algorithms designed to balance thetension between the usefulness of data, as measured by the degree of aggregation (i.e., number of variables collapsed), and protection of anonymity. thematrix mask described by kellermcnulty and duncan could be used as ageneral representation for the hierarchical aggregation. sweeneyõs methodstructures disclosure limitation into a generalized hierarchy in which variablesuppression would typically be at the top. the algorithms compute howmuch a field is distorted as it is moved up the hierarchy toward suppression.sweeney then computes a òprecision metricó for a particular combination ofdata based on how far the variables must move up the table to obtain a givenlevel of security.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the data access, confidentiality tradeoff17in principle, one can obtain a given level of risk while minimizing required data distortion for each field and without resorting to uniform cellsuppression. in computer programs such as datafly, which generalizes values based on a profile of data recipients, and uargus, a similar programused by statistics netherlands, statistical disclosure limitation methods areused that do make data safer but less specific and the overall statistical relationships within the data set less accurate. the key is finding optimal levels ofdistortion across data set fields and exploiting tradeoffs between specificityand anonymity protection. applying her techniques to uargus anddatafly, sweeney concluded that the former tends to underprotect the data,while the latter tends to overdistort.a central message of sweeneyõs presentation was that an incredible rangeof resources can be directed toward cracking data security, yet technology canalso offer solutions to those charged with producing and protecting data. inthe future, sophisticated cryptographic techniques may be implemented. forexample, researchers may be able to use cryptographic keys to access and linkdata. in this way, agencies could monitor access to the data and make theresults of program runs anonymous. while such techniques are visions of thefuture, technological solutions, in sweeneyõs view, already offer greater protection than legislative approaches, which tend to lag behind realtime needsand reflect outdated technological capabilities.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.183ethical and legal requirements associatedwith data disseminationsession ii of the workshop was structured to provide an overview of theethical and legal issues related to data dissemination. mary ann baily,institute for ethics, american medical association, presented a paper,commissioned for the workshop, titled òregulating access to research datafiles: ethical issues.ó donna eden, office of the general counsel, u.s.department of health and human services, outlined her assessment of recentand prospective legislative developments. finally, thomas puglisi of the office for protection from research risks (oprr), national institutes of health,provided an overview of the role of institutional research boards (irbs).ethical issuesmary ann baily described underlying ethical issues raised by the use ofmicrodata, especially longitudinal data that are linked to administrativerecords. in so doing, she articulated the conflicting rights and obligations ofdata subjects, producers, and users, and the role of government in providinga structure within which these conflicts can be resolved.baily outlined positions at both extremes of the policy debate over dataaccess, then made the case for pursuing a middle groundñstriking a balancebetween the right to be left alone and the obligation to cooperate in thepursuit of communal goals. she discussed activities that are essential to setting appropriate limits on data use and the organizational framework required to carry out these activities. she concluded with observations on theimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethical and legal requirements associated with data dissemination19problem of translating societal recognition of a moral right to privacy intoenforceable public policy.cases for and against unrestricted access to microdata for researchin fields such as health care, education, and economic policy, researchbased on microdata can illuminate the nature of social problems and theeffects of public and private actions taken to ameliorate those problems.members of society, including data subjects, can benefit from more efficientuse of their pooled funds (such as tax dollars and health insurance premiums). researchers themselves benefit as well, in terms of advancing researchprograms and fulfilling career goals.given these benefits, and given that the costñoften publicly fundedñofdeveloping databases is high, it may be asked why databases should not bemade widely available to all. such a policy would maximize benefits, and anycosts associated with the additional access could be charged to users whenappropriate.the primary objection to a policy of unrestricted access arises from thepotential effect on data subjects, since disclosure of personal information canbe harmful. disclosure of such information may result in being arrested for acrime, being denied eligibility for welfare or medicaid, being charged with taxevasion, losing a job or an election, failing to qualify for a mortgage, or havingtrouble getting into college. disclosure of a history of alcoholism, mentalillness, venereal disease, or illegitimacy can result in embarrassment and lossof reputation. less directly, research results based on personal data can causeharm by affecting perceptions about a group to which a person belongs.even in the absence of such concrete effects, disclosure can be seen as aharm in itself, a violation of the fundamental right to privacy, derived fromthe ethical principle of respect for individual autonomy. informational privacy has been defined as òthe claim of individuals, and the societal valuerepresenting that claim, to control the use and disclosure of informationabout themó (fanning, 1998:1). gostin (1995:514) highlights the importanceof respect for privacy to the development of a sense of self and personhood:òit is difficult to imagine how, in the absence of some level of privacy, individuals can formulate autonomous preferences, or more basically, developthe capacity to be selfgoverning.ó a lack of respect for privacy makes peoplereluctant to trust others with personal information; for example, they mayconceal sensitive information needed by their physicians to provide effectivetreatment.those who argue for recognition of a strong right to informational privacy claim that access to data about individuals should require their explicitconsent. advocates of this position may acknowledge the research potentialof personal information databases developed by public and private entities;improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20improving access to and confidentiality of research datamany accept the use of such data for socially useful research if the data areaggregated or otherwise processed to prevent identification with a specificperson. they maintain, however, that if the data are personally identifiable,researchers must persuade the data subjects to agree voluntarily to each use.to holders of this view, then, the appropriate policy is no access to personallyidentifiable data without explicit, informed consent.1restricted access: what limits are appropriate?since unrestricted access can cause harm to individuals and also conflictsdirectly with respect for individual autonomy, it is not an appropriate policy.on the other hand, requiring explicit, informed consent for any access topersonally identifiable data is also problematic. on a practical level, having toobtain meaningful informed consent for every use of data would make muchvaluable research prohibitively expensive. meeting this requirement wouldbe costly not only to the research enterprise, but also to data subjects, whowould have to spend time submitting to the process.on a philosophical level, such a policy is focused solely on an individualright and ignores individual responsibilities. the right to informational privacy has never been considered absolute. governments must collect personalinformation to function, and members of society have a civic duty to cooperate. for instance, the u.s. constitution requires that there be a decennialcensus. governments require research results to determine areas in whichpolicy action is needed and what form it should take; additional research isneeded to determine whether policies have been effective. research is also anessential element in the support of individual civil rights and the right to a fairtrial. moreover, private organizations must be able to produce research results to carry out their roles effectively. individuals cannot refuse to providepersonal information to private entities such as educational institutions,health care delivery organizations, and employers unless they are willing toforego education, health care, and employment.in some cases, research can be done on data collected from volunteers,but in others, unacceptable bias would result. moreover, if data collectedfrom voluntary subjects for one purpose should later become essential for an1informed consent is defined in private lives and public policies as òa personõs agreement toallow personal data to be provided for research and statistical purposes. agreement is based onfull exposure of the facts the person needs to make the decision intelligently, including any risksinvolved and alternatives to providing the dataó (national research council and social scienceresearch council, 1993:23). see chapter 3 of the same report for a full description of theterminology, as well as of the historical development and use of informed consent and notification procedures.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethical and legal requirements associated with data dissemination21unforeseen but even more beneficial purpose, obtaining individual consent tothe new use may be impossible, or at least prohibitively expensive.for the above reasons, it is unreasonable to allow individuals completeauthority to control whether and on what terms they participate in sociallyimportant research. therefore, a balance must be struck between the right tobe left alone and the obligation to cooperate in the pursuit of societal goals.according to baily, the appropriate policy is somewhere in between unlimitedaccess to personally identifiable data and access only with explicit informedconsent, with the chosen policy being supported by sufficient security to maintain confidentiality. the difficulty is in reaching agreement on just where thepoint of balance exists in a particular context. for instance, the appropriatepolicy is likely to be different for research databases than for other types ofdata, such as hospital records and marketing information.establishing and enforcing appropriate limitsbaily suggested that three kinds of activities are inherently part of imposing appropriate limits on access to microdata:¥weighing of relative benefits and costsñfirst, data managers must develop information on the benefits associated with research use of personaldata and the harm that could result from granting access. this activity includes investigating the attitudes of data subjects. both benefits and costsmay vary significantly in different contexts. the benefits must then beweighed against the costs to determine access policy, with guidance from andaccountability to the community as a whole through democratic institutions.¥maintenance of confidentialityñdata managers must be able to enforce whatever limits are established. it is impossible to eliminate the possibility of improper use entirely, but security measures must be adequate toprotect legitimate privacy interests. this requires developing information onthe risk of misuse in each case, given the nature of the data and their potentialuses, and tailoring security measures accordingly. there must also be effective sanctions for violations of confidentiality policies, aimed at preventingimproper use, not merely punishing those responsible after misuse occurs.¥public education/notification/consentñdata managers must informdata subjects about information policy and obtain their consent to use of thedata when appropriate. decisions about what people must know, how theyshould be told, and when consent rather than simple notification is morallynecessary are complex, however. it is generally agreed that respect for privacyrequires openness about the existence of databases containing personal information and the uses made of the data, regardless of whether explicit consent isrequired for every use. in practice, however, principles of fair informationpracticeñsuch as those that form the basis for the federal privacy act ofimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22improving access to and confidentiality of research data1974ñare surprisingly ambiguous.2 there appears to be acceptance, if notexplicit acknowledgment, of the fact that personal data will be collected, someof it without subjectsõ explicit, freely given consent.in clarifying the obligations of data managers to inform and seek consentfrom data subjects, it is useful to think in terms of three levels. there shouldbe a base level of education about the role of data and research in makingsociety run well. the goal is to make sure people understand that informationabout them is collected and used, with confidentiality safeguards, as a matterof routine, and that it is their civic responsibility to accede to this in exchangefor medical progress, an effective educational system, protection of their civilrights, and so on. this level implies a category of òordinaryó research usesproducing substantial social benefits with a low risk of harmful disclosure.for research in this category, there is no obligation to notify data subjectsabout each use or to seek explicit consent, although there should be a way forsubjects to learn what research is being done with the data if they wish to doso.the second level pertains to research uses that differ substantially fromthe routine, making it reasonable to notify data subjects and provide justification for the use. for example, a new hypothesis about the cause of an illnessmight lead to new analysis of old data that promises significant benefits withlittle risk. alternatively, a significant change in the underlying benefit/costpicture might lead to new kinds of research or new interest in variables notpreviously examined.the third level pertains to uses for which explicit, informed consent isrequired. a research use might fall into this category because the potential forharm is significantly greater relative to societal benefits, or because the degreeof actual or perceived harm varies substantially across individuals. uses forprivate rather than social benefit also fall into this category.the above categories suggest a way to think about informing potentialparticipants of current and future uses of the data. the immediate researchgoals could be explained, and the participants could be informed that the data2these principlesñas set forth by alan westin and cited by george duncan in chapman(1997:336)ñare as follows: (1) there must be no secret personal data recordkeeping system;(2) there must be a way for individuals to discover what personal information is recorded andhow it is used; (3) there must be a way for individuals to prevent information about them thatwas obtained for one purpose from being used or made available for other purposes withouttheir consent; (4) there must be a way for individuals to correct or amend a record of information about themselves; and (5) an organization creating, maintaining, using, or disseminatingrecords of identifiable personal data must ensure the reliability of the data for their intendeduse and must take reasonable precautions to prevent misuses of the data.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethical and legal requirements associated with data dissemination23might also be used for routine socially beneficial research in the future, withconfidentiality safeguards and without further notification. an importantissue to be addressed is where the linkage of survey data (especially longitudinal data) to administrative records falls along this spectrum. can confidentiality safeguards and accountability be effective enough, and the risk of harmto individuals low enough, to allow most such linkages to be considered òroutineó or òordinaryó research uses in the sense discussed above?concluding remarksbaily concluded her presentation by offering the following assessment:¥there is consensus on the existence of a right to informational privacy,but not on the extent to which policies should go to protect that right or onhow to implement such policies in practice. in a pluralistic society, translating a moral right into enforceable policy is a political problem; inevitably, noone is entirely satisfied with the result.¥it is easier to reach an agreement most people can live with if peopleunderstand that the goal is a practical compromise among competing moralvisions, not the triumph of their own point of view. also, the process ofachieving compromise must both be and be perceived to be one in whichthere is ongoing democratic accountability for what happens as a result.¥finally, it is easier to agree on change when the existing situation isunsatisfactory to nearly everyone, so that there is much to gain from an improved system. at present, personal privacy, even in highly sensitive areassuch as medical information, is far less protected than most people realize.the opportunity exists to both improve safeguards on the use of data andincrease access to data for socially useful research if the right policies areinstituted.recent and prospective legislationduring her presentation, mary baily asserted that implementation of effective access and confidentiality policies requires carefully constructed socialmechanisms. paramount among these is a consistent national legal framework, designed to indicate to both data producers and users what standardsare appropriate and to aid in imposing sanctions for misuse. the need forsuch a framework, which does not now exist, is a recurrent theme in theliterature on privacy and data use. confirming bailyõs assessment, donnaeden provided an overview of recent and prospective legislative developments. speaking primarily about health data, eden observed that coordinated federal privacy legislation to protect health records does not yet exist.this is somewhat of a surprise, given that congress has been working to enactimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24improving access to and confidentiality of research datacomprehensive privacy legislation in health and other areas for many years.in fact, in the health insurance portability and accountability act (hipaa)of 1996, congress set an august 1999 deadline for the enactment of privacylegislation to protect health records, and provided that if that deadline werenot met, the secretary of health and human services would be required toissue regulations to protect the privacy of certain health data.consensus on privacy legislation has not been forthcoming; instead, protections are based on a piecemeal system that originates from both federal andstate levels. the primary laws governing data access are the freedom ofinformation act, the privacy act, privacy and confidentiality laws specific toindividual agencies or purposes, and state laws. the wide variability in statutes governing access to administrative records nationwide makes it difficultfor researchers and others to understand applicable rules. laws dictate whatdata can be collected, the linkages that can be made, and the protections thatare required for data use.bills are pending that would regulate federal statutes applying to largedatabases, including proposals to mandate copyright protection for some.the first major component of legislation pertaining to health information isdirected toward encouraging adoption of standards, particularly in the electronic context, to replace an array of currently existing formats. hipaarequires the secretary of health and human services to adopt standards developed by organizations accredited by the american national standards institute whenever possible. the legislation requires that all health care information transmitted by health plans, clearinghouses, and those providers whoconduct business using electronic transactions comply with these standardswithin 24 months (or, for small health plans, 36 months) of their formaladoption by the secretary.standardization is slated to include the creation of unique national identifiers for health care providers, health plans, employers, and individual patients that will technically facilitate linkages across sources. this practice willensure that different variablesñfor example, for diagnosis and proceduredatañare coded identically across data sets. the standard for individualpatient identifiers is on hold until comprehensive privacy protections are inplace. one of the major gaps in current hipaa requirements is that thestandards will not apply to exactly the same data when those data are held byemployers, some insurers, and government agencies.hipaa also requires the adoption of standards for the security of information transmitted or maintained electronically, and for electronic signatures used in standard health care transactions. the department of healthand human services will issue compliance and enforcement requirements toprovide assurance that, if information is misused, there will be redress. thismove toward standardization will clearly impact researchersõ data collectionefforts, particularly with regard to the types of data that can be linked. stanimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethical and legal requirements associated with data dissemination25dardization will make reading of medical records much easier, and shouldsignificantly simplify the mechanics of data matching and analysis.because congress failed to enact comprehensive health privacy legislation, the secretary of health and human services is now required to issueprivacy regulations. these regulations will be based on recommendations forprivacy legislation prepared by the secretary for congress in 1997. statutorylanguage requires that the privacy regulations address (1) recognition of therights of individual subjects, (2) procedures designed to enforce those rights,and (3) the uses and disclosures permitted. there is as yet no clear administrative mechanism or funding to activate the provisions, which may createadditional delays. moreover, since the new privacy standards will be issued asregulations, not as a statute, state privacy laws will not be preempted; allexisting federal statutes, such as the privacy act and the public health act,also remain in place.at this point, it is unclear how effective these efforts to control the uses ofdata and protect individual confidentiality will be. uncertainty about effectson access and the potential for disclosure will persist until legislation is formulated. eden reviewed several current circuit court cases that indicate possible directions the privacy legislation may take.under hipaa, individual data subjects have some limited rights andprotections. the statute provides both criminal and civil penalties for disclosure of data in violation of the various standards, along with very limitedmonetary penalties. many of the workshop participants expressed the viewthat these rules need to be strengthened and criminal penalties stiffened. thefreedom of information act gives the public certain rights to data held by thefederal government. federal, state, and local governments authorize themselves to use data for basic operations and particular social purposes. researchers and data collectors have very few explicit legal rights to data.in conclusion, eden offered her assessment of practical resolutions forcurrent issues. given that the prospects for passage of comprehensive privacylaws appear to be remote, she envisions a continued piecemeal approach tolegislation. the potential for practical solutions may be greatest in the areasof copyright law and contracts. the internet offers a wide range of possibilities for creating instant contracts and user agreements. eden predicted abroad expansion in the use of clickon and other technologyfacilitated agreements, most of which offer the promise of enforceability through existingcontract law. additionally, these mechanisms do not require special recognition by congress of a separate private right of action. agreement violatorscan be taken directly to state or, in certain cases, federal court. in some states,data subjects have the right to take legal action against a secondary user orlicensee if terms and conditions are violated.as noted earlier, a number of participants expressed skepticism about theability of privacy laws to keep pace with technology and to effectively targetimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26improving access to and confidentiality of research dataindividuals and groups that pose the greatest risk to data security. the protection offered by hipaa, as well as by regulations that will be adopted underthis legislation, is limited by its restriction to health plans, clearinghouses, andthose providers who conduct business electronically. eden noted that thesecretary of health and human services is on record as supporting the needfor comprehensive federal legislation in this area.role of institutional review boardsthe irb is the most direct regulatory link between researcher and research data. thomas puglisi presented a paper coauthored by jeffery cohen,also of oprr, titled òhuman subject protections in research utilizing datafiles,ó providing an overview of irb procedures, limitations, and prospects.oprr is in charge of enforcing federal policy for the protection of humanresearch subjects. nearly every executive branch agency of the federal government that supports humansubject research is a signatory to this policy,which makes researchers subject to a common set of regulations. the irbprocess and the requirement for informed consent are the two core protections provided to individuals by these regulations.federally funded researchers become subject to the irb process as soonas they access potentially identifiable private information about living individuals. information is considered private if an individual could reasonablyexpect that it would not be used for purposes other than that for which it wasprovided. the irb is charged with judging whether risks to data subjects areòreasonableó in relation to the anticipated benefits of data release and whetherthe risks are minimized by a sound research design, as well as with ensuringthat informed consent is acquired and that confidentiality protections underlying data dissemination are adequate.with regard to federally mandated informed consent, regulations requirethat subjects be notified about the degree to which the confidentiality of theirrecords will be maintained. meeting this requirement is not problematic forcertain specificuse data sets, but it is typically not possible to provide accurate notification about information that will be linked or otherwise be incorporated in larger data sets. it can be difficult to predict the level of security fordata that are extended beyond their original use, as is often the case withclinical or administrative data not initially collected as part of a defined research project.similarly, it is frequently impossible to acquire informed consent forresearch of the type discussed in the workshop session on case studies. insurveybased social science research, irbs may waive the consent requirement if they find that three conditions are met: (1) the risk to subjects isminimal, (2) use of the information for research will not adversely impactthe rights and welfare of the subjects, and (3) it would not be practicable toimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ethical and legal requirements associated with data dissemination27obtain informed consent. the second and third conditions usually pose littledifficulty; the first, however, requires more judgment. as noted above, thereis no set of standards an irb can apply in deciding whether a given application should be considered as involving minimal risk and whether the confidentiality protections in place are adequate. in fact, it probably is not possible to establish a universal standard, given the casebycase variation in keyparameters.with regard to data access policy, puglisi noted that the inherent challenge of the irb mandate is in interpreting a standard, since the regulationsdo not establish one. judgments must be made about what type of data can bereleased, and in what form, for each research project. the irb must weigh therisk of information disclosure and the potential ramifications associated withit against the anticipated benefits to research and policy, and then decide onan appropriate level of protection.during this process, irb staff must first evaluate the nature and sensitivity of the data. could disclosure put data subjects at risk of criminal or civilliability? could it be damaging to financial standing, employability, insurability, or the reputation of an individual or group? obviously, the moresensitive the information is, the more stringent the protections must be. riskis a function of the level of identifiability (and data protection) and the sensitivity of the data.the probability of disclosure and subsequent damage often appears trivialfrom the perspective of the researcher, but disclosure of private informationdoes occur. puglisi provided several realworld examples of inadvertent disclosureñone involving a case study and one involving exposure of notes at aprofessional meeting. he also noted instances in which data were released byinvestigators to news reporters and to congressional committees. the risksare real, but difficult to quantify.frequently, irbs are advocated in proposed legislation as the vehicle forresolving data access and confidentiality tensions. there are hurdles to overcome, however, if irbs are to serve this purpose optimally. irb personnel areoften no more competent than other groups to make unstructured decisions.federal regulations do not require that irb members have training in statistical disclosure limitation techniques and other methods of protecting confidentiality. moreover, the federal requirement that irbs have the scientificexpertise to judge research they review is not being met uniformly. thesefactors make it impossible to carry out cost/benefit assessment, which is,strictly speaking, a violation of federal regulation.another problem pointed out by puglisi is that irb standards tend tobecome increasingly restrictive as more procedural constraints are adopted;staff who are inadequately trained may have incentives to err on the safe side.with no increase in the expertise of irb personnel, this trend is likely tocontinue. irb administrators have an obligation to acquire (either internallyimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28improving access to and confidentiality of research dataor through outside consultants) enough professional expertise to combat fearsthat an institution will be held liable for a mistake. communication betweenresearchers and irbs is also key to improving knowledge levels and enhancingthe performance of irbs.another important aspect of efficient irb utilization involves matching aresearch project with the appropriate irb. in most instances, a researcherõslocal irb will not be the one best suited to evaluate research value and datasecurity risks. the model puglisi recommends would require that data accessproposals be reviewed at the location where data are maintained. the hostirb is in the best position to balance research potential against confidentialityrisks. this approach would allow the host irb to play an educational role aswell, which is appropriate since its staff should be most knowledgeable aboutspecific data characteristics, research applications, and conditions underwhich data should be shared. in acting as the responsible gatekeeper, the hostirb could provide information to local irbs that would help streamline theapproval process. researchers could submit judgments from the overseeingirb, demonstrating to the local irb that a knowledgeable, respected body hasapproved confidentiality protections. robert willis noted that this is essentially the model that has been implemented successfully at hrs. given theexpanding role of data enclaves, it is likely that, along with auditing procedures developed by the national center for education statistics, the bureauof labor statistics, and the national science foundation, irbs will for theforeseeable future continue to be the central mechanism for monitoring researchersõ access to data.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.294alternative approaches forlimiting disclosure risks andfacilitating data accesspresentations throughout the workshop confronted aspects of the restricted data, restricted access debate. data alteration allows for broaderdissemination, but may affect researchersõ confidence in their modeling output and even the types of models that can be constructed. restrictingaccess may create inconveniences and limit the pool of researchers that canuse the data, but generally permits access to greater data detail. this chapterreviews the presentations and discussions addressing these two approaches,highlighting their advantages and disadvantages. it also summarizes the discussion of potential technical solutions and the use of legal sanctions to modifythe behavior of individuals with access to the data.data alterationthere are both technical and statistical solutions for protecting data security. several workshop participants argued that these solutions need to beblended with the substantive knowledge of researchers to solve disclosureproblems in a way that satisfies all interested communities. this sectionreviews the discussion of statistical approaches, for which a presentation byarthur kennickell, titled òmultiple imputation in the survey of consumerfinances,ó was the centerpiece. technical approaches are discussed later inthis chapter.participants representing the research community expressed frustrationwith some of the standard perturbation methods employed by the large longitudinal surveys. finis welch of texas a&m university articulated severalimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30improving access to and confidentiality of research dataconcerns. he argued that the introduction of noise to variables can, in certaininstances, create major headaches for the modeler. for instance, adding noiseto a field that will be used as a dependent variable in models may be acceptable as long as the expected value of the disturbance is zero, and hence efficiency of estimates is preserved. when dispersion is added to fields that willbe used as explanatory variables, however, expected errors tend to be correlated with variable values. welch believes priority should be given to developing perturbation methods that, if invoked, will preserve the key statisticalproperties of a data set. he made some specific recommendations as well.first, he advocated topcoding at fixed quantile levels, over time, rather thanat absolute values; when the percentage of records topcoded changes, seriousproblems arise in longitudinal or panel modeling contexts. welch also wouldlike to see scramblingñas opposed to truncationñof òsensitiveó data abovethe topcoded cutoff points to maintain full distribution, but eliminate knowledge of where an individual record fits into the distribution.kennickellõs use of a multiple imputation technique offers a more sophisticated form of data perturbation, one that could potentially improve datasecurity (and, hence, allow greater accessibility) without seriously compromising modeling utility. several workshop participants expressed support forthe idea of exploring this type of approach to gain a clearer idea of howmodels might perform using imputed data and to assess the promise of thetechnique in terms of data protection. there is now a large multiple imputation apparatus in the survey of consumer finances (scf); kennickell hasshown it can be done. what remains to be seen is how effective and howuseful the technique will be. kennickellõs research is moving toward answering that question.the scf is conducted by the federal reserve board, with survey information collected by the national opinion research center at the university ofchicago. the data include sensitive and detailed information about respondentsõ assets and liabilities, as well as extensive demographic and geographicinformation. the survey, which oversamples wealthy households, is derivedfrom statistical records based on tax returns maintained by the statistics andincome division of the internal revenue service. to gain access to thisinformation, the fed agrees to a disclosure review similar to that for thepublic statistics of income files.because the scf is subject to legal constraints on data release, and because it contains sensitive information on a sample that includes a highwealth population, the survey is a logical candidate for the multiple imputation experiment as a means of disclosure limitation. because missing datahave always been an important problem in the scf, substantial resourceshave been devoted to the construction of an imputation framework that canbe used to simulate data to replace those originally reported.for the publicrelease version of the scf, the survey applies standardimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.limiting disclosure risks and facilitating data access31perturbation and data limitation techniquesñrounding, collapsing categories, providing geographic detail only at the fed division levels, truncatingnegative values, withholding variables, and a variety of more minor changesthat cannot be disclosed. in addition, the full final internal version of the datais used to estimate models that are, in turn, used to simulate data for asubsample of observations in the public version of the data set.kennickellõs multiple imputation system deals with all variables, imputing them one at a time. it is iterative and generates, as the name implies,many imputations. the models, which are different for binary, continuous,and categorical variables, involve essentially relaxing data around reportedvalues. the method requires a full probability specification at the outset; thenotion behind the multiple imputation is to then sample from the full posterior distribution. it is this sampling that generates the variability needed fordisclosure limitation.kennickell described the application of multiple imputation for the scfas a type of structured blurring: òa set of cases that are identified as unusualplus another set of random cases are selected, and selected variables withinthose cases are imputed subject to a range constraint (unspecified to thepublic), but they are constrained to come out somewhere in a broad neighborhood around the original values.ó the knowledge of which data valueshave been intentionally altered is also partially disguised. the cumulativeeffect of the process is to decrease a userõs confidence that any given recordrepresents an actual original participant.the method is computationally intensive, but kennickell described itonly òas a modest step in the direction of generating fully simulated data.ó heargued that it is possible to simulate data that do a good job of reproducing allsimple statistics and the distributional characteristics of the original reporteddata. the extent to which imputed data will be able to provide a satisfactorybasis for the leadingedge research required for fully informed policy is notyet clear. it is not known how imputation affects error structures of complicated models; what sampling error means in a fully simulated data set; whathappens to complex relationships among variables; and, more generally, howresearchers will interpret modeling results. one way to begin addressingthese questions is to create synthetic versions of existing data sets with knownnonlinear relationships or complex interactions and see whether they couldhave been detected with the simulations. many of the workshop participantsagreed that these performance questions require serious attention and thatthe answers will ultimately determine the success of imputation methods.quantitative assessments of the extent to which disclosure risks can be reduced using these methods are also needed.at this point, social science researchers are skeptical about the accuracy ofanalyses not based on òoriginaló data. richard suzman of the national institute on aging (nia) added that all leading researchers currently supported byimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32improving access to and confidentiality of research datania are opposed to the imposition of synthetic data.1 finis welch andsuzman each noted that the value of synthetic data sets in longitudinal research is unproven; with the exception of the 1983ð1989 panel, the scf iscrosssectional. while complex longitudinal data increase disclosure risks, itis also more difficult to preserve key relationships and interactions amongvariables when this type of data is altered. perturbation, therefore, may bemore damaging to analyses that rely on longitudinal data than to those thatrely on crosssectional data.these criticisms notwithstanding, stephen fienberg of carnegiemellonuniversity considers kennickellõs work a major success in the use of modernstatistical methods and disclosure limitation research. fienberg made thepoint that all data sets are approximations of the real data for a group ofindividuals. rarely is a sample exactly representative of the group aboutwhich researchers are attempting to draw statistical inferences; rather, it represents those for whom information is available. even a population data set isnot perfect, given coding and keying errors, missing imputed data, and thelike. fienberg finds the argument that a perturbed data set is not useful forintricate analysis not altogether compelling. yet researchers are more criticalof controlled modifications to the data and the introduction of structuredstatistical noise than of sampling noise.thus two clear perspectives emerged among workshop participants. onone side are those who believe that, in addition to its role in statistical disclosure limitation, replacing real samples with records created from posteriordistributions offers great potential in terms of maintaining fidelity to theoriginal data goal (as opposed to the original data). on the other side areresearchers who are concerned that synthetic data do not fit the model usedby top researchers as they actually work with the data. their position is that,in addition to delaying data release, imputation programs blur data in waysthat create inaccuracies, such as those described earlier. suzman expressedthe need for the national institutes of health and others to advance empiricalresearch that would address these issues. as these methods are advanced, itmay become possible to provide researchers with clearer explanations of howimputation impacts the data. moreover, data management programs may bedeveloped that offer the option of choosing between using an altered publicdata set and submitting to additional safeguards to gain access to raw data.restricted accesspresentations during session i illustrated the benefits that can be derivedfrom studies using complex research data filesñthat is, microdata files with1suzman did acknowledge a role for synthetic data in creating test data sets on which researchers could perform initial runs, thus reducing time spent in data enclaves.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.limiting disclosure risks and facilitating data access33longitudinal data, contextual information for small areas, or linked administrative data. each research example cited was carried out under restricteddata access arrangements. none could have been undertaken solely usingmicrodata files that are available to the general public with no restrictions.many of the analyses required the use of files that link survey data with administrative record information for the same persons.a survey of organizations that released complex research data files aspublicuse files was described during session iii by alice robbin, indianauniversity (for further details about this survey, see chapter 5). files withlinked administrative data were seldom released in that format, primarilybecause of concerns that users with independent access to the administrativesource files might be able to reidentify persons whose records were includedin the research file. restrictedaccess files were distinguished from publicusefiles by the inclusion of more detailed information on the geographic locationof sample persons and contextual data, such as median income classes andpoverty rates, for the communities where they lived.while usually applied in a way that preserves basic statistics, maskingprocedures used to reduce disclosure risks associated with publicuse filesmay introduce substantial biases when more complex methods of analysis areapplied to the data. therefore, arrangements for providing special or restricted access are often used to satisfy the needs of users for whom the available publicuse data files are insufficient. several such arrangements havebeen developed in recent years; primary among these are (1) use of the data byusers at their own work sites, subject to various restrictions and conditions(commonly referred to as licensing); (2) controlled access at sites (often calledresearch data centers) established for the purpose by custodians of the data;and (3) controlled remote access, in which users submit their analytical programs electronically to the custodian, who runs them and reviews the outputsfor disclosure risk prior to transmission to the users.2 the next chapter reviews workshop presentations that described current and planned restrictedaccess arrangements at various agencies.advantages and disadvantages of data alterationversus restricted accessthe most frequently cited advantage of data alteration, as opposed torestricted access, is that it facilitates broader public release and simpler useracquisition. steven fienberg articulated the advantage of data perturbation2there are other possible arrangements, such as the release of encrypted microdata on cdroms with builtin analytical software, but these methods are not widely used at present andwere not discussed at the workshop.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34improving access to and confidentiality of research dataconcisely: òthese methods (particularly if they can be developed to producemore acceptable statistical properties than people are willing to admit) address a very compelling public need, which is the sharing of data collected atpublic expense that are a public good and would otherwise not be broadlyaccessed.ó3 proponents argue that sophisticated perturbation methods offerone of the few tools that may help meet simultaneously the need of researchers to access better data and the need to protect respondents who supplyinformation.the primary disadvantage of data alteration generally and advanced perturbation specifically is researchersõ decreased confidence in modeling output; use of such data is believed by some to limit modeling flexibility as well.researchers at the workshop expressed concern that data alteration inhibitscomplex modeling, particularly when the relationships that have the greatestpolicy relevance are nonlinear or when causal modeling requires correct ordering of temporal events. for example, it may be difficult to accuratelymodel realworld retirement behavior, which is thought to be driven by jumpsin eligibility and benefit rules faced by workers, if blurring techniques areused to smooth such spikes in the data. moreover, even if key statisticalproperties are preserved, researchers must be convinced that this is the casebefore they will use the data; they must also learn how to interpret and reportthe results of models estimated from altered data. these are real costs associated with data perturbation.the challenge for proponents of data imputation approaches is to determine how accurately relationships among data fields can be preserved and tocommunicate their findings to researchers. the extent to which this challenge can be met is, as of now, uncertain. robert boruch articulated a strategyfor addressing this need. he suggested that it is important to monitor theperformance of increasingly complex models, when data used in estimationprocedures are altered in various ways, by building a knowledge base of calibration experiments.the advantage of restricted access is that those granted permission havefuller access to primary data. on the other hand, costs are incurred in enforcing access rules and in operating data enclaves and remote programs. restricted access arrangements also impose an operational burden on researchers. these operational costs can be significant; for instance, kennickellreported that the fed does not have the research budget to establish datacenters or even licensing agreements. while their multiple imputation program is a major undertaking, it is a less costly method of providing broad3ivan felligi and others believe that if data linkage continues to increase, it may not bepossible to safely offer public release files at all. while this view may be extreme, it does pointto the tradeoff: given more linking possibilities and richer native data, more restriction isrequired to hold disclosure risk constant.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.limiting disclosure risks and facilitating data access35access to researchers. kennickell also believes that, among users of the scf,unrestricted access to the data is a higher priority than is access to unrestricteddata.while researchers at the workshop did express a general preference forlimited access to full data, as opposed to public access to limited data, theyalso noted that the onsite requirement can be burdensome. thus, they voicedenthusiasm for the idea of developing flexible remote access systems. researchers also want assurances that restricted access data sets at centers wouldnot replace the types of data now publicly available. most of the researchersindicated a preference for the licensing option, which is viewed as least burdensome (since they plan to follow access rules). agency representativesnoted that the sanctions in existing laws could be strengthened (see the nextsection). however, it is impossible to ensure that all users are familiar withthe laws, and federal agencies are ultimately responsible for data safety. licensing is effective because it transfers a portion of that responsibility to users,allowing agencies greater latitude in dissemination (see also the discussion oflicensing in chapter 5).ultimately, if different types of users can be identified reliably, appropriate levels of access can be established for each. researchers are probablywilling, for selected studies, to go through the required steps to use lessaltered data under restricted access arrangements. in some cases, the existence of legal penalties for misuse will provide a sufficient deterrent, and accessto full raw data may be allowed. participants voiced the view that a onesizefitsall approach to data access is unsatisfactory, since it would likely producedata of insufficient detail for cuttingedge research while perhaps unnecessarily disclosing information not needed for more general research. similarly,marketers or the general public who want fast web access likely cannot begranted the same access to the highestquality data as those who undergosecurity precautions.participants were also optimistic about the ability to use technology toobtain a proper balance between confidentiality and accessibility. latanyasweeney and others described evolving approaches that may eventually advance confidentiality protection within both data alteration and restrictedaccess frameworks. for example, there may be ways to improve remote accessusing rapidly evolving netbased foundations that would allow researchers torun interactive programs externally (see also the discussion of remote accessin chapter 5). more sophisticated linking may also be possible, particularly ifmethods can be developed to monitor the combinations of variables regularlyused by researchers. once a clear research need to link certain variables ordata sources has been established, it may be safer to link at the source insteadof having copies of both data sets go out in their entirety each time a researcher needs to make the link. similar approaches may enhance the abilityto establish joint data centers or centers with multiple sources of data.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36improving access to and confidentiality of research datarole of legal sanctionsstricter legislative protections offer another potentially efficient means ofimproving confidentialityñefficient because the probability of disclosure canbe decreased without imposing costs on ruleabiding researchers. indeed,several participants, including richard suzman, suggested that perhaps thismethod of data protection should be given the highest priority. these participants cited a recommendation from the report private lives and public policies that there should be òlegal sanctions for all users, both external and agencyemployees, who violate requirements to maintain the confidentiality of dataó(national research council and social science research council, 1993:7) andadded that existing penalties should be stiffened.4j. michael dean pointed out that the potential for unintended disclosureexists at the data source as well as at the user stage. a primary reason thatagencies are able to maintain confidentiality is their ability to impose a highcost penalty for misbehavior (violators can lose their jobs). dean argued thatthis regulation should be expanded across agencies and institutional lines,thereby creating more linking opportunities; in other words, the regulatoryapproach to native databases could be extended to linked data. again, suchapproaches are generally applauded by researchers, who prefer regulation ofthe people using databases over alteration of the databases themselves.presenters from the hrs noted that, in part because of a lack of confidence in the adequacy of sanctions, the funding agency (nia) demands thatthe university of michigan provide linked data only to individuals workingunder federal grants so that disregard for the confidentiality guidelines will besubject to federal rules. the situation is different for agencies that have alicensing mechanism tied to the data, which allows for more options. otheragencies must operate purely within the realm of the privacy act. manyparticipants believe that increased harmonization of the legal framework isneeded, if for no other reason than to allow researchers to know roughly whatis expected without that expectation shifting from context to context.4donna eden pointed out that there is considerable room for increasing penalties. for instance, in hipaa there exists no private right of action for subjects. the act sets forth broadcriminal prohibition, but only minor criminal sanctions for disclosure of data in violation ofregulations. a $100 civil penalty is unlikely to be effective against corporate or even mostindividual abuses. also, it should be noted that the size of a penalty is of limited importance ifit is rarely imposed.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.375current agency andorganization practicesthis chapter reviews presentations that described current practicesaimed at preserving the confidentiality of microdata. practices relatedto release of publicuse files and restriction of data access are reviewedin turn.release of publicuse filesmore than 20 years ago the federal committee on statistical methodology (1978) recommended that all federal agencies releasing statistical information formulate and apply policies and procedures designed to avoid unacceptable disclosures. in releasing publicuse filesñtypically made availablewith no restrictions other than, in some cases, imposition of a user feeñagencies generally comply with this recommendation through the use of various forms of statistical disclosure limitation. two workshop presentationsdescribed policies and procedures used for the release of microdata. alicerobbin provided an overview of results from a survey on the statistical disclosure limitation (sdl) practices used by government agencies and researchorganizations that distribute publicuse microdata files with longitudinal,linked administrative, or contextual data for small areas. alvan zarate of thenational center for health statistics (nchs) presented an overview of theinteragency confidentiality and data access groupõs (icdag) checklist ondisclosure potential of proposed data releases, developed to help ensure thatimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38improving access to and confidentiality of research dataprincipal safeguards are in place when electronic data files are released forpublic use.1statistical disclosure limitation practicesalice robbin, thomas jabine, and heather koball conducted a survey oforganizations that produce and distribute complex research microdata files.the survey was intended to contribute empirical evidence on how knowledgeabout sdl procedures has been applied by these organizations in the production of publicuse microdata. information was gathered on the types ofmicrodata that are released publicly, current sdl practices applied to publicuse data, and organizationsõ demarcation between publicuse and restrictedaccess data. several themes emerged from this information, including (1) theextent of variation in sdl practices across organizations, (2) special risks todata confidentiality, and (3) the tension between the data needs of researchersand data confidentiality.variation in organizational sdl practices. survey respondents conveyed familiarity with the broad issue of data confidentiality. all respondentsknew that direct identifiers of respondents should not be released andexpressed concern about protecting respondentsõ identities. furthermore,because of concerns about data confidentiality, few organizations release publicuse geographic/contextual data for small areas. similarly, linked administrative data are generally confined to a restricted access format.on the other hand, the survey revealed considerable variation across organizations in terms of knowledge about sdl techniques. this variation is afunction of the extent of practitionersõ knowledge about deductive disclosure,the type of organization, and the timing of decisions related to release ofpublicuse files. some respondents appeared to be unfamiliar with terminology and concepts associated with data confidentiality, while others were wellversed in these matters.2 the treatment of special òatriskó variables, such asage and income, varies widely by organization.most organizations appear to base their sdl decisions for publicuselongitudinal files on a crosssectional model. that is, they assess the risks ofdisclosure for a given cross section, with little consideration of longitudinaleffects. one factor that may contribute to the relatively liberal policies ap1the icdag was recently renamed the committee on data access and confidentiality.2this generalizationñthat there is a wide variety in knowledge and practice of sdl techniquesñwas corroborated by erik austin of the interuniversity consortium for political andsocial research. austin has been involved with this issue for three decades; his organizationhas examined thousands of files and reviewed sdl plans so that data can be released publicly.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current agency and organization practices39plied to longitudinal data is the fact that followup data are often releasedseveral years after earlier panels. decisions about previous data releases mayor may not play a role in decisions pertaining to the release of longitudinalfiles. a second factor that appears to influence decisions about release policiesfor longitudinal data is knowledge of user preferences. staff are sensitive tothe fact that longitudinal data are deemed particularly useful when the datacontain the same variables over time.the survey responses indicated greater variation among the standards ofuniversities than among those of government agencies.3 government agencies, particularly the bureau of the census and nchs, have standards onwhich they base decisions about release of publicuse data and sdl techniques. many of the census bureauõs standards have had a significant influence on other organizations that distribute microdata. the census bureaualso has a disclosure review board, which reviews microdata sets prior torelease. nchs has an irb; a data confidentiality committee; and a dataconfidentiality officer, who makes final decisions about sdl techniques forpublicuse data.special risks. in general, issues related to deductive disclosure have beenbrought to the attention of organizations only in recent years; as a result, thesdl techniques applied to microdata sets have changed. moreover, olderlongitudinal microdata sets are at particular risk for deductive disclosure asthey contain more detailed information about respondents than would bereleased under current practices. the data sets also follow respondents overlong periods of time, so they contain a wealth of detailed information, someof which is revealed only as a result of the longitudinal structure. the combination of changing sdl standards and the compilation of data on respondents over time may make older longitudinal data sets particularly vulnerable.at the same time, it is often the longitudinal structure that makes thesemicrodata sets particularly useful to researchers.needs of researchers versus data confidentiality. organizations appear to be keenly aware that their microdata sets are more useful if theyprovide greater detail. one respondent stated that his organization increaseddata availability because of the demands of users. the organization increasedthe level at which income was topcoded in response to complaints about thelack of data detail. other respondents indicated that their decisions to release3austin agreed with this point as well, noting that academic data producers typically have lessknowledge about sdl techniques than agency counterparts. he recommended establishingvenues for communicating sdl techniques more effectively.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40improving access to and confidentiality of research datadata are based, in part, on providing as much data as possible to researchers.they òadvertiseó publicuse data on web sites by highlighting the dataõs detailed and longitudinal nature. this advertising is designed to increase use ofthe data and to demonstrate to program funders that the data distributionfunction is being performed. ease of access for researchers was also cited byrespondents as an aspect of the tradeoff between data utility and the need forconfidentiality. the internet makes access to publicuse data increasinglyeasy; this ease of access facilitates the research process, while also increasingthe risk of deductive disclosure.the survey findings are generally consistent with the body of empiricalevidence that has accumulated on organizational decision making. they reveal that members of organizations are sensitive to the external environment,and that structural and political factors influence decisions related to releaseof publicuse data. the findings also reveal that structures within organizations can be fragmented. organizational units are governed by different policies, some of which are contradictory. further, staff turnover contributes toloss of institutional memory, and historical records about data release decisions are often not maintained to compensate. survey design, data collection,and preparation of publicuse files may be overseen by different units of thesame organization or by different organizations, and this can affect information flows. management control also differs across organizations and units;some project managers are familiar with the nuts and bolts of data releasedecisions, while others are not.agency staffs are sensitive to the consequences of releasing data that couldidentify individuals, particularly in light of legislative initiatives responding topublic concerns about confidentiality. one agency respondent noted that hisorganizationõs dissemination of a publicuse file of survey data had ceasedbecause of a recently enacted statute that was interpreted as preventing distribution of the data. regardless of whether the statute was properly interpreted, what is important is that a perceived threat from the external environment resulted in the restriction of important data. furthermore, policiesgoverning data access and confidentiality are subject to change. institutionalinterpretations of these policies influence decisions about the release of publicuse microdata, how data will be prepared, and the conditions under whichaccess will be permitted.robbin, jabine, and koball offered a number of policy recommendationsregarding the release of publicuse files. these recommendations were directed to producers, distributors, and analysts of largescale microdata files,as well as to funding agencies and project managers.communicating and educating about statistical disclosure risk andlimitation procedures. appropriate policy and policy compliance requireimproved communication about current research on disclosure risk, as wellimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current agency and organization practices41as education of professionals about good practice. research into disclosurerisk has been conducted for more than 20 years. statistical agencies havepublished documents analyzing the risk and providing guidelines for goodpractice. peerreviewed journals have published articles on the subject. theamerican statistical associationõs committee on privacy and confidentialityhas prepared informational materials that are available at its web site, andicdag has disseminated its checklist on disclosure potential of proposeddata releases (discussed below). yet agency and organization staffs appearinadequately aware of current sdl practices. the result is that, in some cases,statutory confidentiality requirements go unmet, while in others, data areoverly restricted. to facilitate dissemination of information about good sdlpractices and standards, robbin, jabine, and koball recommended producingand circulating a bibliography of key publications that describe evaluativedeductive disclosure methods. the american statistical associationõs committee on privacy and confidentiality has prepared bibliographies on thesubject, and the committeeõs work can serve as the basis for selecting additional informational resources.documents on the subject need to be available at a basic technical levelto be useful for staff who may have less statistical expertise but are on thefront lines of data production. responsibility for ensuring that data organizations employ good sdl practices should not lie only with data processingstaff (the survey results indicated that, in many cases, programmers weregiven nearly sole responsibility for preparing publicuse files). internal review units should be available to evaluate proposed releases of microdatafiles; outside of government, irbs and other groups can incorporate expertson deductive disclosure.the survey revealed that a number of respondents, while familiar with thegeneral issues of data confidentiality, were not knowledgeable about disclosure risk and sdl techniques. thus, there exists a clear opportunity to achieveadvances through further education. workshops and panels at annual professional meetings offer an appropriate forum for launching such efforts.interactive environments such as irbs and data centers represent additionalongoing opportunities.institutionalizing communication to improve sdl practices. a general set of rules governing data release is not possible because virtually everyproposed release is unique in some way, even within the same agency andprogram. it is important to obtain expertise on the subject in the initialplanning stages of statistical programs and research projects, and then laterduring evaluation and testing to prepare publicuse files. improved documentation is also an essential aspect of communicating survey objectives andmethods. detailed documentation can minimize the loss of institutionalmemory that results from staff turnover and other factors.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42improving access to and confidentiality of research datadata user participation in data release. there are multiple approachesto developing good sdl practices. data users have important knowledge tocontribute during the early stages of organizational decision making on thepractices to be employed.checklist on disclosure potential of proposed data releasesthe introduction to the checklist (interagency confidentiality and dataaccess group, 1999:1) clearly describes its function:federal statistical agencies and their contractors often collect data from persons, businesses, or other entities under a pledge of confidentiality. beforedisseminating the results as either publicuse microdata files or tables, theseagencies should apply statistical methods to protect the confidentiality ofthe information they collect. . . . [the checklist] is one tool that can assistagencies in reviewing disclosurelimited data products. this checklist isintended primarily for use in the development of publicuse data products.. . . the checklist consists of a series of questions that are designed to assistan agencyõs disclosure review board to determine the suitability of releasing either publicuse microdata files of tables from data collected from individuals and/or organizations under an assurance of confidentiality.zarateõs overview of the checklist was presented within the broader themeof how agencies operate òcaught between the twin imperatives of makingusable data available, while also protecting the confidentiality of respondents.ózarate noted that, while disclosures can occur, it is not justifiable to withholdvaluable data for legitimate research purposes.zarate explained that the office of management and budgetõs statisticaland policy office helped form the icdag in 1991 to coordinate and promoteresearch on the use of statistical disclosure methods and to catalog relateddevelopments at agencies and among academic researchers. the checklist isintended for use in risk assessment by agency statisticians in charge of datarelease. although it is not a formal regulatory document, its widespreadvisibility should motivate a closer look at organizational methods.though the checklist does offer nontechnical discussion and advice onall basic sdl techniques, users must be familiar with survey design and filecontent. zarate pointed out that none of the rules can be followed blindly.there are real constraints on any attempt to standardize data protection; forinstance, rules may be very different when applied to data for a demographically unusual group or for a survey topic that involves especially sensitiveinformation. the checklist is not a substitute for knowing the data that are tobe released.researchers at the workshop voiced the concern that, if users are notadequately knowledgeable about the data and the associated risks and benefits, they may misuse documents such as the checklist as a rationale forimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current agency and organization practices43overprotection. with institutionsõ reputations on the line, standardizationcan lead to conservatism in release policies, which researchers worry willinevitably limit the availability of data required for the most important andinnovative research. in this context, the checklist must be an evolving document. users must be educated enough to adapt it to fit their specific requirements, reflecting, as zarate put it, òthat there is an art as well as a science todisclosure analysis.ócurrently, the checklist emphasizes proper handling of geographic information. òsmall areasó are defined as 100,000 people by the census bureau;previously, geographic information was available only at the 250,000 personsampling unit level. the more recent definition reflects a rule of thumbwithout a real quantitative basis. zarate argued that there is a real researchneed to develop empirical evidence to justify recommendations regardinggeographic specificity. in fact, the disclosure risk posed by geographic delimitation can be assessed only in the context of other variables that are availablein data records, as well as information about ease of external linkage. addingdetailed geographic identifiers to specific age, race, and other contextual variables makes data more useful, but also increases the probability of disclosure.the checklist directs attention to the variety of available external files (e.g.,voter registration, birth and death records) that could be linked to discloserecord identity. it may also help guide decisions when data are being issued ina format that is easily manipulated.finally, zarate suggested that the checklist needs to be developed to direct special attention to longitudinal data. at the time of the workshop, thechecklist had only scratched the surface in terms of alerting data disseminators about additional risks that arise when records are followed through time.if an agency is locked into certain procedures, it can become clear over timethat appropriate levels of security are not in place. for instance, characteristics that can be predicted from one period to the next may not be masked bytopcoding or other techniques. the checklist does not currently addressthese issues, but is expected to do so in the future.restriction of data accessseveral of the workshop presentations described existing and plannedrestricted access arrangements for managing complex research data files. paulmassell of the census bureau provided a comparative overview of licensingarrangements used by six u.s. agencies and two universitybased social science research organizations. marilyn mcmillen of the national center foreducation statistics (nces) gave a detailed description of licensing procedures used by nces, with emphasis on inspection procedures used to monitor observance of the conditions of access. mark mcclellan of stanford university described procedures employed to protect confidentiality at animproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44improving access to and confidentiality of research dataacademic research center that is using microdata files from multiple sourcesunder licensing arrangements. several presentations addressed research datacenters: j. bradford jensen of the census bureauõs center for economicstudies and patrick collins of the recently established california census research data center at the university of california, berkeley, described theircenters. john horm reported on nchsõs research data center, which offersboth onsite and remote access to the agencyõs nonpublicuse data sets. andgarnett picot of statistics canada outlined his agencyõs current restrictedaccess procedures, as well as its plans to establish several research data centers.the following sections summarize the features of the three principal kindsof restricted access arrangements as presented and discussed at the workshop,as well as one special procedure involving respondent consent that has beenused by statistics canada. the main features of interest of these arrangements are the adequacy of the data for the desired analyses, eligibility requirements, the means used to provide adequate protection for individually identifiable data, the costs of obtaining and providing access, and the way thesecosts are shared by users and custodians of the files.licensingnces was one of the first organizations to issue licenses to researchersthat allow them to receive and use nonpublic microdata sets at their ownwork sites. nearly 500 licenses for files from several different nces surveyshave been issued since 1991. there are no specific restrictions by type oforganization; licenses have been issued to government agencies at all levels,universities, research corporations, and associations. applicants must provide a description of their research plan and demonstrate that it requires theuse of restricted data, identify all persons who will have access to the data, andprepare and submit a computer security plan. they must execute a licenseagreement signed by an official with authority to bind the organization legallyto its conditions and submit affidavits of nondisclosure signed by all personswho will have access to the data. they must agree to submit to unannouncedinspections of their facilities to monitor compliance with security procedures;an nces contractor carries out a systematic program of inspections. licensees are subject to severe criminal penalties for confidentiality violations, asspecified in the national education statistics act of 1974.during the past decade, several other agencies and organizations havedeveloped and used licensing agreements for access to restricted data sets.specific conditions vary. some licensors provide access only to institutionscertified by the national institutes of health as having met procedural criteriafor irbs or humansubject review committees. the duration of license agreements varies, with extensions being available in most instances. some licensors require that publications based on the data be submitted to them forimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current agency and organization practices45disclosure review; others leave this responsibility to the licensee. most agreements allow for unannounced inspections of facilities, but not all licensorshave a systematic inspection program such as that conducted for nces. every licensee must cover the costs of going through the application process,which generally requires a significant amount of paperwork, and of establishing the physical and other security safeguards required to obtain approval oftheir computer security plans. unlike nces, which uses agency funds tocover the costs of processing applications and conducting inspections, somelicensors charge user fees to cover these costs fully or partially.potential penalties for violations vary substantially. federal agencies otherthan nces that release files may be able to impose penalties under the privacyact or other legislation; however, these penalties would be less severe thanthose available to nces. penalties available to universities and other licensing organizations are generally of a different kind: immediate loss of accessand denial of future access to data, forfeiture of a cash deposit, notification ofviolations to federal agencies that fund research grants, and possible liabilityto civil suits for violating contract provisions.research data centersthe census bureau pioneered the distribution of publicuse microdatafiles from the decennial census and household surveys. however, microdatafrom establishment censuses and surveys cannot be publicly released becauseof higher associated disclosure risks. the census law does not permit releaseof restricted data to users under licensing arrangements. thus, the only viableoption is to provide for access to such files at secure sites maintained by thecensus bureau. access is allowed only to persons who are regular or specialsworn census employees and would be subject to penalties provided in thelaw for violations of its confidentiality provisions.the census bureauõs center for economic studies, established in themid1980s at census headquarters in suitland, maryland, initially constructedlongitudinal files of economic data that were used for research by census staffand by academic research fellows working at the center as special swornemployees. since then, additional research data centers have been establishedin the bureauõs boston regional office; at carnegiemellon university in pittsburgh; and at the university of california at los angeles and the university ofcalifornia, berkeley. another center is scheduled to open at duke universityin 2000. to date, only files of economic data for firms or establishments havebeen available, but the centers are planning to add restricted data sets fromthe decennial census and major household surveys, as well as linked employerðemployee data sets.all researchers desiring to use the research data centersõ facilities mustsubmit proposals that are reviewed for feasibility, scientific merit, disclosureimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46improving access to and confidentiality of research datarisk, and potential benefits to the census bureau.4 the applicant must explain why the research cannot be done with publicly available data files. tominimize disclosure risks, projects are limited to those that emphasize modelbased estimation, as opposed to detailed tabulations. to ensure that no confidential data are disclosed, all research outputs are reviewed by center staffand may not be removed from the center without the administratorõs approval. fees are charged for use of the centersõ facilities, but some fellowshipsare available on a competitive basis to partially defray these costs; grantees ofthe national science foundation and the nia are exempted.nchs recently established a research data center that provides both onsite and remote access to nonpublic data files from several nchs surveys (seebelow for discussion of the centerõs remote access arrangements). the mainrequirements and conditions for onsite access are similar to those of thecensus bureauõs research data centers. research proposals must be submitted and are reviewed by a committee for disclosure risk, consistency with themission of nchs, and feasibility given the availability of the centerõs resources. all outputs are subject to disclosure review before being taken offsite. users are charged a basic fee for use of the centerõs facilities and anadditional fee for any programming assistance provided by the center staff.statistics canada recently decided to establish six to eight research datacenters to provide access to data from five new longitudinal surveys of households and persons, including one with linked employer data. other restricteddata sets will be added as needed. the features of the centers will be similar inmost respects to those of the census bureauõs regional centers. they will belocated at secure sites that have standalone computing systems and are staffedby statistics canada employees. they will operate under the confidentialityrequirements of the canadian statistics act, and only òdeemed employeesówill be allowed access to the data. proposed research projects will be subjectto a peer review process led by canadaõs social science and humanities research council. for users to be considered òdeemed employees,ó they mustproduce an output or service for statistics canada. to meet this requirement,each user must produce a research paper that will be part of a series sponsoredby the agency. the research paper will not include policy comments, but aftermeeting the requirement to produce the paper, researchers will be free topublish their results anywhere, accompanied by their interpretation of thepolicy implications.4access to identifiable data by special sworn employees is permitted only when such access isdeemed to further the agencyõs mission, as defined by law.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current agency and organization practices47remote accessarrangements for provision of remote access to nchs restricted datafiles, which preceded the establishment of the research data center, have nowbeen taken over by the center. center staff construct the data files needed forvarious analyses, a process that can include merging usersupplied files withthe appropriate nchs data files. the center provides a file of pseudodata inthe same format as the real data so users can debug their programs. in thismanner, the number of backandforth iterations is substantially reduced.sas is the only analytical software that can be used, and some of its functions,such as list and print, cannot be used. users submit their programs to thecenter by email; following disclosure analysis, output is returned to them byemail. charges for access to a file for a specified time period depend on thenumber of records included in the file. there is also a charge for file construction and setup services provided by center staff.statistics canada has used remote access procedures on an ad hoc basis.an example is the provision of access to nonpublic data from a longitudinalsurvey of children and youth. the results have been mixed; a small evaluationsurvey and informal contacts with researchers have indicated that the systemis judged by some to be cumbersome to use and not sufficiently interactive.respondent consent proceduresection 12 of the canadian statistics act permits statistics canada toshare nonpublic survey data with an incorporated organization for statisticalpurposes, provided that survey respondents have given their permission to doso. the agency has used this procedure, known as a section 12 agreement, tomake such data sets available to other federal departments and to provincialstatistical agencies. the respondent consent procedure must specify the organizations that will have access to the data. typically, from 90 to 95 percent ofrespondents, who can be either persons or firms, give permission for theirdata to be used in this way.discussionone trend that emerged from the presentations and discussion of restricted access was the rapid growth during the 1990s in the number of researchers obtaining access to complex research data files through all three ofthe principal methods of restricted access. the establishment of regionalresearch data centers and the inclusion of demographic files at the censusbureauõs centers is likely to fuel a further expansion. nces and the nationalscience foundation are collaborating on the development of a manual oflicensing procedures, which could potentially be used by other agencies andimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48improving access to and confidentiality of research dataorganizations with the authority to employ this arrangement. adoption of amore uniform set of procedures could reduce the cost and time required tosubmit proposals to licensors. there have been some negative user reactionsto the controlled remote access approach because of limitations on softwareoptions, delays, and the relative difficulty of interaction between researcherand data source. however, a substantial research effort is now under way todevelop more effective procedures for controlled access to microdata sets viathe internet.although expanded access to research files by a variety of methods islikely, there are some legal obstacles. both the census bureau and nchs, forexample, have concluded that they do not have the legal authority to issuelicenses that would allow researchers to use restricted data sets at their ownfacilities. some workshop participants suggested that the census bureaushould make restricted data files of other agencies available at its research datacenters. even if this were done, however, access to files from various agenciesat a central point would probably still require different administrative procedures because of differences in the laws governing access to each agencyõsdata. under interagency agreements, nces has undertaken distribution offiles created by other agencies using licensing arrangements; it has the legalauthority to do so as long as the files in question include data relevant toeducation.the use of restricted access arrangements, which has been deemed necessary to provide adequate protection for confidential information about individuals and businesses, results in increased costs to conduct research. custodians of the data files need additional resources to process applications,operate inspection systems, staff research data centers, and inspect outputs toensure that disclosure does not occur. researchers require resources to prepare applications for access, to provide appropriate physical security for thedata, or to visit a secure site. at present, these costs are being covered partlyby federal agency budgets and partly by user fees. the census bureauõs research data centers have been supported in part by grants from the nationalscience foundation and nia, but may eventually have to recover more oftheir costs from users. several workshop participants suggested that, if possible, graduate students should be exempted from such user fees.various restricted access arrangements offer different levels of protectionfor the confidentiality of individually identifiable information. researchersworking in research data centers under the supervision of agency employeesare under closer supervision than those licensed to work with the data at theirown facilities. although there have been no known disclosures of individualinformation from nces data files released under licenses, inspections haveturned up numerous violations of the license requirements, such as failure tonotify the agency of changes in personnel authorized to use the data. protection of the data under controlled remote access arrangements depends primaimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.current agency and organization practices49rily on the effectiveness of automated screening systems and the vigilance ofagency staff responsible for manual reviews of outputs prior to their release tousers.most arrangements for restricted access are timelimited, and licenseesare generally required to return or destroy their files and derived work filescontaining potentially identifiable records. it was pointed out that such provisions can make it difficult or impossible for other researchers to attempt toreplicate research findings or for either the original or other researchers topursue leads generated by the initial results.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51references and bibliographychapman, a.r., ed.1997health care and information ethics: protecting fundamental human rights. kansascity, ks: sheed and ward.fanning, j.1998privacy and research: public policy issues. seminar presentation in statistical seminar series on confidentiality, washington, dc, october 15. 1998. office of theassistant secretary for planning and evaluation, u.s. department of health andhuman services.federal committee on statistical methodology1978report on statistical disclosureavoidance techniques. statistical policy working paper 2. subcommittee on disclosureavoidance techniques. washington, dc: u.s.department of commerce.gostin, l.o.1995health information privacy.  cornell law review 80:451528.interagency confidentiality and data access group1999checklist on disclosure potential of proposed data releases, statistical policy office,u.s. office of management and budget.jabine, t.b.1993aprocedures for restricted access data. journal of official statistics 9(2):537589.1993bstatistical disclosure limitation practices of united states statistical agencies.  journal of official statistics 9(2):427454.juster, f.t.1991discussion. american statistical association 1991 proceedings of the social sciencessection. alexandria, va.: american statistical association.national research council1979privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response. panel on privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response, committee on national statistics, committee on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: nationalacademy pressimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52improving access to and confidentiality of research datanational research council and social science research council1993private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. panel on confidentiality and data access, george t. duncan, thomas b.jabine, and virginia a. de wolf, eds. committee on national statistics. washington,dc: national academy press.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.55appendixaworkshop participantspresentersnorman bradburn (workshop chair), national opinion research centererik austin, interuniversity consortium for political and social researchmary ann baily, institute for ethics, american medical associationrobert boruch, university of pennsylvaniarichard burkhauser, cornell universitypatrick t. collins, california census research data center, university ofcalifornia, berkeleyj. michael dean, university of utahgeorge duncan, carnegiemellon universitydonna eden, office of the general counsel, u.s. department of health andhuman servicesstephen e. fienberg, carnegiemellon universityrobert m. gellman, privacy and information policy consultant,washington, d.c.rachel gordon, university of illinois at chicagojohn horm, national center for health statisticsj. bradford jensen, center for economic studies, bureau of the censussallie kellermcnulty, los alamos national laboratoryarthur kennickell, federal reserve boardpaul massell, bureau of the censusmark mcclellan, stanford universitymarilyn m. mcmillen, national center for education statisticsimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56improving access to and confidentiality of research datagarnett picot, statistics canadatom puglisi, office for protection from research risks, national institutesof healthalice robbin, indiana universitylatanya sweeney, carnegiemellon universityrobert weathers, cornell universityfinis welch, texas a&m universityrobert willis, university of michiganalvan zarate, national center for health statisticsinvited guestspaul p. biemer, research triangle institutelewis berman, national center for health statisticskatharine browning, office of juvenile justice and delinquency preventionjay casselberry, energy information administrationchris chapman, bureau of labor statisticsstephen cohen, bureau of labor statisticsvirginia a. de wolf, office of management and budgetcathryn dippo, bureau of labor statisticsnancy donovan, general accounting officepatricia doyle, bureau of the censusjudy droitcour, general accounting officejohn eltinge, bureau of labor statisticsanastasia j. gage, usaidgerald w. gates, bureau of the censusdan gaylin, u.s. department of health and human servicesnancy gordon, bureau of the censusbrian greenberg, social security administrationeasley hoy, disclosure review board, bureau of the censusbetsy humphreys, national library of medicinethomas jabine, consultant, committee on national statisticsnancy kirkendall, department of educationjulia lane, center for economic studies, bureau of the censussusan lapham, bureau of transportation statisticsthomas louis, university of minnesota, and member, committee onnational statisticsdavid mednick, bureau of transportation statisticsjay meisenheimer, bureau of labor statisticsheather miller, office of extramural research, national institutes of healthnancy miller, national institutes of healthjoseph moone, u.s. department of justicekristen robinson, national center for health statisticsimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a57stuart rust, bureau of labor statisticsjames scanlon, u.s. department of health and human serviceslois schein, social security administrationeleanor singer, university of michiganedward spar, council of professional associations on federal statisticsjames spletzer, bureau of labor statisticsrichard m. suzman, national institute on aginglouise wideroff, national institutes of healthlaura zayatz, bureau of the censusnrc staffjamie casey, committee on national statisticsbarney cohen, committee on populationkevin kinsella, committee on populationheather koball, committee on national statisticschristopher mackie, committee on national statisticsterri scanlan, committee on national statisticsmiron straf, committee on national statisticsbarbara boyle torrey, commission on behavioral and social sciences andeducationandrew white, committee on national statisticslee zwanziger, institute of medicineimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58appendixbworkshop agendathursday, october 14, 19998:45welcome and opening remarksbarbara boyle torrey, director, commission onbehavioral and social sciences and educationmiron straf, director, committee on national statisticsrichard suzman, behavioral and social research program,national institute on agingintroduction and workshop previewnorman bradburn, workshop chair9:05session i.linked longitudinal databases:achievements to date and prospectsa.topic 1: case studiespaper 1:hrs application: òhow policy variables influencethe timing of social security disability applicationsóð richard burkhauser, cornell universityð robert weathers, cornell universityimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b59paper 2:nlsy application: òconfidential data fileslinked to the national longitudinal survey of youth, 1979:a case studyóð rachel gordon, university illinois at chicagob.topic 2: risks and rewards of data linkingpresentation: òprotecting confidentiality of linked datasets:donõt throw the baby out with bathwateróð j. michael dean, university of utahc. topic 3: report from the conference on the value oflinked datapresentation: robert willis, university of michigand. general discussion of papers/presentations11:10session ii. legal and ethical requirements fordissemination: recent and prospective developmentsa. topic 1: philosophical issuespaper: òregulating access to research data files:ethical issuesóð mary ann baily, george washington universitydiscussant: robert boruch, university of pennsylvaniab. topic 2: recent and prospective new legislationpaper: donna eden, u.s. department of health andhuman servicesdiscussant: robert gellman, privacy and informationpolicy consultantc. topic 3: problems and issues of institutionalreview boardspaper: thomas puglisi/jeffery cohen, office for protectionfrom research risks, national institutes of healthd. general discussion, led by norman bradburnimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60improving access to and confidentiality of research data2:00session iii. procedures for releasing publicusemicrodata filesa. topic 1: agency practices for releasing publicusemicrodata filespresentation: òchecklist on disclosure potential of proposeddata releases,ó developed by the interagency confidentialityand data access groupð alvan zarate, national center for health statisticspaper: òa survey of statistical disclosure limitation (sdl)practices of organizations that distribute public usemicrodataóð thomas jabine, private consultantð alice robbin, indiana universityð heather koball, committee on national statisticsdiscussant: erik austin, interuniversity consortium forpolitical and social researchpaper: òmultiple imputation in the survey of consumerfinancesóð arthur kennickell, federal reserve boarddiscussant: stephen fienberg, carnegie mellon universityb. topic 2: quantification of disclosure riskpaper: ð sallie kellermcnulty, los alamos nationallaboratoryð george duncan, carnegie mellon universitydiscussant: latanya sweeney, carnegie mellon university4:30general discussion5:00closing comments and adjournimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b61friday, october 15, 19999:00session iv. procedures for restricting access: who gets accessto microdata, and under what conditionsa. topic: use of restricted access procedures for major linkedlongitudinal databasespaper: òreview of data licensing agreements at u.s.government agencies and research organizationsóð paul massell, u.s. census bureaudiscussant: mark mcclellan, stanford universitypresentation: remote data access at the national center forhealth statisticsð john horm, national center for health statisticsdiscussant: finis welch, texas a&m universitypresentation: statistics canada procedures; data liberation andassociated internet background informationð garnett picot, statistics canadapresentation: data licensing systemsð marilyn mcmillen, national center for educationstatisticspresentation: data centersña critical assessmentð patrick collins, california census research datacenterð j. bradford jensen, carnegie mellon census researchdata center1:30general discussionimproving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62improving access to and confidentiality of research data2:00session v. workshop summaryreview and address questions posed at the opening of theworkshopð thomas louis, member, committee on national statisticsð norman bradburn, workshop chairgeneral response ð workshop participants2:45closing comments/adjourn